**California Institute of Technology**

**Oral History Project**

**Interview with James J. Morgan**

**by Shirley K. Cohen**

**Pasadena, California**

**Caltech Archives, 2001**

**Copyright Â© 2001 by the California Institute of Technology**

**\
JAMES J. MORGAN**

**TABLE OF CONTENTS**

*Session 1:*

pp. 1-10

Upbringing in Ireland and New York, during the Depression. Family
background. Parochial schooling. Studied civil engineering at Manhattan
College, 1950s. Growing interest in water purification. Early 1960s and
beginnings of public environmental consciousness.

> pp. 10-19

Graduate work at Univ. of Michigan. MS in environmental health
engineering, with C. J. Velz, 1956. Instructor of civil engineering at
Univ. of Illinois; takes chemistry courses there. Three years at Harvard
with W. Stumm; PhD 1964. Recollections of Stumm. Joint appt. in
chemistry and engineering at Univ. of Florida 1963-1965.

> pp. 20-29

Offered job at Caltech, 1965; recommended to J. McKee by G. M. Fair, S.
Friedlander, and W. Stumm. Gives seminar at Caltech January 1965;
arrives for good in September. To W. M. Keck Eng. Lab. Relationship with
J. McKee. McKee builds environmental health engineering dept., hiring W.
North, S. Friedlander, and Morgan. 1970, new degree program in
environmental engineering science. Relationship to civil engineering
faculty.

*Session 2:*

> pp. 30-39

Recollections of D. O'Connor, Manhattan College. Admin. duties at
Caltech: Freshman Admissions Committee 1969-72; dean of students
1972-75; EO for env. engineering sci. 1974-1980; v.p. for student
affairs 1980-1989. Ed. *Environmental Science and Technology* 1966-74.
Recollections of L. DuBridge.

> pp. 40-48

Balancing teaching and research with admin. duties. Comments on job of
v.p. for student affairs. His love of teaching.

> pp. 49-58

Chairs faculty 1977-79. Service on search committee for new president
after departure of H. Brown. Interaction with trustees as v.p. for
student affairs. Instrumental in getting Braun Gym built. Fosters
contact between trustees and undergraduates.

*\
Session 3:*

> pp. 59-67

Recollections of being on TV quiz show in high school; his interest in
history. Recollections of consulting at Caltech. Work on ACS committee
on environment, 1967-1969. Work on NRC panels. Consultant for Procter &
Gamble, LADWP, So. Cal. Coastal Water Research Project.

> pp. 68-77

Work on textbook, *Aquatic Chemistry,* with W. Stumm. Summer in Woods
Hole, 1974. Comments on PhD students F. Morel, J. Pankow, A. Stone, H.
Liljestrand, Y. Erel. Hopes to go to Israel.

> pp. 77-95

1999 Stockholm Water Prize, to be shared with W. Stumm. Comments on
earlier awards and his career at Manhattan College. Teacher award (1959)
from Danforth Foundation. Certificate of merit from ACS (1961). Paper on
"Chemical Aspects of Coagulation," multiple awards. Nalco award for his
student W. Sung. S. Freese award. History of Stockholm Water Prize.
Membership in Assoc. of Env. & Eng. Sci. Professors and lectureship.
Repeats as EO for env. science 1993-96. General comments on Caltech and
his plans for the future.

*Epilogue:*

pp. 96-98

James Morgan's Account of Receiving the Stockholm Water Prize and the
Clarke Prize

CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

Interview with James J. Morgan By Shirley K. Cohen

Pasadena, California

> Session 1: May 25, 1999

Session 2: June 1, 1999

Session 3: June 16, 1999

Begin Tape 1, Side 1

Cohen: Good morning, Dr. Morgan. Good of you to come and have this
interview with us. Perhaps we could start with your telling us about
your family background: your parents, what they did.

Morgan: I am the first child of Irish immigrant parents. My father and
mother were married in 1927 and came to New York the next day. I was
born in 1932 in New York. A year later my parents went back to Ireland,
where they owned a farm, and I was raised there.

Cohen: Why did they do that?

Morgan: The Depression.

Cohen: Oh!

Morgan: I often say it was hard to figure out where it was easiest to
starve most graciously. So they had the farm, and they went back to it
and stayed there for about---oh, I guess it must have been four and a
half years. And then we came back. I had the occasion to go back for the
first time, just ten years ago, to see it, and it was a very
poor-looking farm. I guess most of the farms are, in that part of
Ireland---which is the county of Monaghan, one of the border counties in
the northern part of Ireland. It's very, very poor land, so it must have
been a very scrappy existence. I only remember the pleasant part---being
a kid on a farm and having a dog and things of that sort.

Cohen: So you had an extended family there? You had grandparents, aunts,
and uncles?

Morgan: Grandparents, aunts, and uncles, that's right. And I still do
have at least a dozen first cousins living in that small ten-square-mile
area of Ireland. Anyway, the family came back about half a year before I
started first grade. So I started first grade in a parochial Catholic
school in the Bronx. And then after about three and a half years we
moved to a different part of New York---Washington Heights, on the Upper
West Side. In the fourth grade, I went to P. S. 189, whose song had the
immortal lines "Enthroned between two rivers bright, our schoolhouse
nobly lies."

Cohen: Oh, that's nice.

Morgan: Those turned out to be the Harlem River and the Hudson River.
\[Laughter\] I finished public grammar school.

Cohen: What did your father do?

Morgan: My father had many different jobs over time. Actually, he came
to the United States first in 1922, before he was married, and he was a
motorman on the trolleys. And then when he came back, after he and my
mother were married, I think he did that again for a while. Then when we
all came back in 1937 or so, the Depression in fact was worse. I
remember that one of his first jobs was as a construction worker on the
new Independent subway---which I grew up calling the Sixth Avenue
subway---and that was his job for quite some time. Then by the time I
was in about the fourth grade and can remember such things, he divided
his time between being a building superintendent and a plumber. And I
remember still with great pleasure that when I was about fourteen he
actually taught me plumbing. I knew how to thread pipes and do elbows
and joints and things of that sort.

Cohen: I see. So your interest in water started early. \[Laughter\]

Morgan: I didn't know it was an interest in water. And occasionally he
would divert to being a high school custodian. I remember that he was
custodian at Evander Childs High School, up in the Bronx, which I've
never seen.

I have a younger sister who was born in Ireland. She's about four years
my junior. She still lives in the New York area, out in Bay Shore. And
as is often the case, we are now very, very close. When we were young,
we couldn't stand the sight of one another. She's one of my best friends
now. It's a very happy thing to say.

Cohen: Oh, that's nice!

Morgan: My mother passed away at the age of seventy-seven. My father
passed away in Ireland. He went back to Ireland after he retired in New
York. He passed away at the age of seventy-three.

Cohen: So you mean that after they were done working, they went back to
Ireland?

Morgan: No. He went back to find them a place to live.

Cohen: Would you say that their attachment was never very strong to this
country?

Morgan: Never, \[except\] in the following sense: I think their
attachment was strong because they could see that it was where their
children were going to have a better life. I often admire my father when
I think about the perils \[he faced\]. He crossed the ocean five times
in order to find a place to settle down and have a job and raise a
family; my romanticization of that is that it was a very pioneering sort
of thing to do. So they were very attached to Ireland all the time that
they lived in New York.

Cohen: Did they become citizens?

Morgan: My father did fairly early on. My mother never did. She didn't
see the need for it as long as my father was a citizen. So when my
father went back, in 1968, the idea was to find a place to live, because
they had long since deeded over the farm to one of his relatives many,
many years before. And while he was over there, he contracted bronchial
pneumonia and passed away in a matter of just two and a half months. My
mother was living with us in California temporarily at the time. In
fact, we were in San Diego that summer---the summer of 1968.

So they had an attachment to Ireland which was very, very strong. Almost
all the friends of the family in the West Side neighborhood in which I
grew up were Irish people---not only Irish people but from the same part
of Ireland back home.

Cohen: So it was like a little colony over here.

Morgan: But fortunately for me, I grew up as a typical New York
kid---especially after I started to go to public school, which was just
an accident. I would have gone to parochial school probably all the way
through if it weren't for the fact that I had whooping cough when I was
very young and lost a whole half year in parochial school. So when we
moved to the West Side, Washington Heights, my mother tried to enroll me
in the local parochial school, and they said, "Well, we'll have to leave
him back six months, because we only work on a twelve-month calendar."
So she refused and put me into the public school, which was the best
thing that ever happened to me, personally, because now I met Armenians,
Greeks, Jews, Italians, Germans, all sorts of different people.
Personally, it changed my whole view of life. Although when I was
through with public school I went to a Catholic high school---one of the
large melting-pot Catholic high schools, which is still very, very
successful at moving people up the social ladder. That's their mission.
Cardinal Hayes High School, over on the Grand Concourse. I went there,
and then I went to a Catholic college. But it had nothing to do with
religion at that point; it had to do with who would give me a
scholarship. So I went to Manhattan College, which is a smallish school
with an engineering program and a business program and a liberal arts
and science program. They gave me a scholarship, and I had a New York
State Regents scholarship. So I actually, believe it or not, made a
little money going to college for four years.

And then, after that, I left New York, never really to return. I was not
as attached to New York as---

Cohen: So you got a good education---between the high school and---

Morgan: I did. I was fortunate in that the high school gave me a very
solid grounding in mathematics and science. One of life's little
ironies, though, is that because of some sort of counseling mistake,
even though I went to a Catholic high school---and everybody knows that
if you go to a Catholic high school, you've studied Latin---I never
studied Latin. I never studied French. I never studied German. And when
I came to the guidance counselor to be certified for graduation, I
remember him saying, "There's something terribly wrong here."
\[Laughter\] And I said, "What's that?" He said, "You've never studied a
language." And I could honestly say, "Nobody ever told me to." Now,
there was nothing to be done about it, because I graduated in the top
twenty of a class of 750.

Cohen: I was going to say that you probably were a good student.

Morgan: I was a successful student. My first love was history, actually.

Cohen: Is that right?

Morgan: And if I had won the scholarship that I was hoping to win to
Fordham University---another Catholic university, as it turns out---I
would have gone there, because they had a special program which would
allow people to catch up if they had somehow not studied languages in
high school. And that was my first love---American history. But no
scholarship, no Fordham. So I went to Manhattan. I was also admitted to
Columbia.

Cohen: But that would have been expensive?

Morgan: Well, it would have been free, if I had won the NROTC
scholarship. I passed the academic part and then, ironically, failed the
physical. All my life I've had what's called excessive curvature of the
spine. I still have it. And it's the cause of pretty much lifelong back
pain, which is a little bit hazardous for somebody who still plays
basketball and tennis.

Anyway, that's the story of how I ended up at Manhattan, and that brings
me to the end of my New York life.

Cohen: So then you finished college?

Morgan: I finished college and went to the University of Michigan.

Cohen: And what was your major \[at Manhattan\]?

Morgan: Civil engineering. In the fifties, when I entered college, it
was the same year that the Korean War started. I received my induction
notice in August of 1950, and I was advised by the college---since I was
already admitted and would soon be enrolled---to simply tell my draft
board that I was about to be enrolled in an engineering program. And
everybody in that freshman class who was in engineering received an
automatic deferment. And almost everybody that I can remember from my
high school who was studying liberal arts was drafted. It gave me a very
strange outlook on life, which had to do with probabilities and being
lucky or being unlucky. And then two years later, many of those people
who had been drafted came back and resumed. They were only in the
service for two years. They came back in 1953 and picked up college
where they had left off.

Cohen: And of course they had the GI Bill.

Morgan: That's right.

Cohen: Wasn't that extended to the Korean War veterans?

Morgan: Yes. So civil engineering was the thing that attracted me most,
once I was enrolled in engineering. But the irony, again, has to do with
that little mistake of not having studied language. Because after my
first year in engineering, in which I did very well, I tried to transfer
to the School of Arts and Sciences at Manhattan College.

Cohen: You still wanted to do history?

Morgan: And they wouldn't let me.

Cohen: Because of the language?

Morgan: Same deal. But by this time I was starting to find my feet in
engineering. That is, I started to see things that were appealing. Civil
engineering was appealing to me. And it was in my junior year that I
really saw the social side of engineering. I became interested in water
and water purification and some of those aspects.

Cohen: When did the word "environmental" come into being?

Morgan: That's interesting. If you trace the word "environmental" back
to Caltech, which is a later part of the story, Jack McKee used it for
the first time in 1960, when the faculty started a new degree program
called environmental health engineering.

Cohen: Right. And we will talk about that.

Morgan: Early on, the part of civil engineering that I started to pursue
was called, depending on the university you were in, either
public-health engineering---which is what it was called at the
University of Michigan, where I did my master's degree---or sanitary
engineering.

Cohen: So it was environmentally focused.

Morgan: Oh, yes. But the problems were what I call the classical
twentieth-century problems, which are the prevention of disease through
proper water treatment and the prevention of water pollution through
proper waste treatment. In other words, sanitation for human health
protection and sanitation to protect natural waters. And that's what I
saw as---

Cohen: It connected you to society in some way.

Morgan: Yes. Part of the disappointment for my father was that he could
see that I was never going to be interested in making money. And, of
course, one of the things that excited him about my going into
engineering was that (a) it validated my education, and (b) he thought,
"Well, this son of mine will make a good living." Well, in the long run
I made a good living, but I never was attracted to what I would call the
business side, or the professional engineering side. I took the first
examination for my license and passed it, but I really got more and more
attracted, as I went on into my twenties and early thirties, to the
applied-science side of it.

Cohen: So you enjoyed your math and your science and your chemistry, and
things like that.

Morgan: Well, there's a great irony about the chemistry, because
chemistry was the course that I disliked most intensely in my freshman
year at college.

Cohen: Is that right?

Morgan: Because it was taught in a way that I can only describe as
militaristic. In fact, we used to joke---and it wasn't a very good
joke---that the man who ran the chemistry laboratory for all freshman
must have escaped from Nazi Germany, because he had such a militaristic
style. So I left freshman chemistry thinking, "Whew! Boy, I'm glad I'll
never have to do anything like that again!" I was wrong. \[Laughter\]
But it took me several years to find out.

Anyway, the environment---other than in the sense of water supply and
treatment---started to become a national issue in, I would say, the late
fifties. And that's when chemical pollution started to be recognized.
And it was in 1962 that Rachel Carson wrote her famous book, *Silent
Spring*. Public consciousness of the environment in a broader sense, in
my experience, dates to about 1957, 1958. And then Rachel Carson's book
in 1962.

Cohen: That's quite interesting. Because I'm thinking, having just seen
this Pauling exhibit and the to-do they made about the atomic
bomb---that didn't enter into health consciousness?

Morgan: Oh, it did in the following way. In 1958, when I went to visit
Harvard for the first time---because by that time I was starting to
think of graduate school in a full-time way---one of the things I
noticed was that there were these collectors scattered around the
Harvard campus. So I asked one of the people \[and got the response,\]
"Oh, those are the rainwater and fallout collectors of Professor
\[Harold A.\] Thomas \[Jr.\]. He's studying the contamination of water
from bomb fallout." So the AEC \[Atomic Energy Commission\], at a number
of universities in the late fifties and well on into the sixties, but
certainly for the first time in the fifties, was very, very interested
in knowing where the bomb fallout went. And of course bomb testing was
going on in the Pacific, as you remember. And the jet stream was
carrying it across the Northern Hemisphere and dropping it across the
United States, and then on over into Europe, and so forth. Apparently,
one of the jokes at Harvard---Harvard students having some of the
eccentricities that Caltech students are famous for---was that the only
difficulty with these samplers was how to keep the Harvard students from
urinating in them. They thought that would be a great thing to do.
\[Laughter\]

Cohen: You know, the silence about this may have had something to do
with national security. They didn't want any protests to stop them from
testing.

Morgan: I guess so, yes. But that was an era in which, I think, Rachel
Carson's book---and a few things maybe less dramatic than that---made
the environment a much more general issue than it had been before. When
I started to become aware of it, as an undergraduate, it was really
\[only\] a professional issue. You got a bachelor's degree, or maybe a
master's degree, and you were qualified to work in a consulting
engineering firm, a state health department, possibly with the United
States Public Health Service, or possibly you went to other
countries---before there was a Peace Corps---and did things like AID
\[Agency for International Development\] work and so forth. And what
happened with the advent of chemical pollution as a recognized fact is
that more and more people became interested in it. People who didn't
start out with any professional connection to the environment at all
suddenly took a very strong interest in it and became very, very well
recognized. One of the great public figures in the sixties was Barry
Commoner.

Cohen: OK. I do remember his books.

Morgan: And one of the things that he did was to use student dental
samples in order to trace the fallout and the accumulation of strontium
in the human body \[in\] bones and teeth.

Cohen: Is that right? How interesting.

Morgan: And he did that in \[Washington University in\] Saint Louis. His
original career was microbiology. Sheldon Friedlander, who was at
Caltech for many years and was a good colleague and friend, used to joke
that the modern sanitary engineers would be people like Barry Commoner.
Partly Sheldon was joking because he didn't like that, and partly he was
joking because he could see the truth in it---which was that science of
a much wider scope was going to be important. It wasn't going to be a
matter of a little, close community of people who did environmental
work; it was going to become larger and larger. And Sheldon himself was
a chemical engineer. He was one of the people who actually attracted me
to Caltech.

Cohen: Is that right?

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: OK. Well, let's do your graduate work first.

Morgan: Well, I finished my master's degree at the University of
Michigan \[1956\], where I also met my wife. We both received our
master's degrees there; then we were married in Ann Arbor and I moved to
the University of Illinois.

Cohen: And what was your master's degree in?

Morgan: It was in environmental health engineering---what was then
called public-health engineering.

Cohen: I see. OK. So already it was distinguishable as a field.

Morgan: Yes, that's right. There were two places you could study it at
the University of Michigan, and I studied it in both---that is, I was a
hybrid student. I worked in the School of Public Health as a research
assistant, and I took courses in the medical school and also in civil
engineering. Down on the main campus in civil engineering, it was called
sanitary engineering; and up on the hill in Public Health it was called
public-health engineering.

Interestingly enough, there's a long tradition in the United States of
environmental protection going through schools of public health.
Columbia was very, very famous in the twenties and thirties for its work
on stream sanitation. And there was a great faculty member there named
Earle B. Phelps who had a protÃ©gÃ© named Clarence J. Velz, who was the
man I eventually worked with for my master's degree at the University of
Michigan. So they came to a concern about water from a public-health
perspective. In other words, the survival of harmful organisms in the
water was one of their interests. Disinfection was another one of their
interests. So there were various threads that were separate through most
of the twentieth century that now, in our time, are more or less all
together.

Then I went to Illinois to teach. After having a master's degree, I
liked to tell my students that I thought I knew everything there was to
know.

Cohen: You still hadn't taken any languages?

Morgan: Actually, yes. I spent two years getting my master's degree at
Michigan, because I worked half-time in the School of Public Health as a
research assistant and the rest of the time I took courses at a
half-time rate, so it took me two years to get a master's degree. And in
that time I took my first language course. It was a German course, and
it was called German Reading for Scientists and Engineers. That was my
first formal contact with \[a foreign\] language, and I found out that I
enjoyed it---although German was probably the most difficult thing for
me to start with. I probably would have found it easier to start with
French. But I was told by somebody that if you want to get a PhD, you're
going to need to know how to read German and maybe another language. And
the choices then tended to be usually French and German, then later
Russian. So after these two years at Michigan, in which I studied a
variety of mathematics and chemistry and microbiology, I took my first
advanced mathematics courses. Because in civil engineering in the
fifties, you essentially took two years of calculus, and that was
it---unlike Caltech, which even in the forties and fifties was setting
the standard for mathematics as a foundation for all of its scientists
and engineers.

Cohen: But how about physics? Didn't you take physics?

Morgan: Oh, yes. I took two years of physics.

Cohen: The calculus was enough mathematics for the physics they did?

Morgan: Yes, it was, but it wouldn't have been enough for the graduate
level. So when I went to the University of Michigan, one of the first
courses I took was differential equations, which would have been the
next \[level of course work\].

I went to Illinois because I saw a journal on the library shelf called
the *Journal of Engineering Education,* put out by the American Society
for Engineering Education. And I saw that it was published on the campus
of the University of Illinois. So, completely on a lark, I wrote to the
editor and said, "If your journal ever learns about teaching
opportunities\...." And I wasn't thinking of Illinois in particular, I
was just thinking of engineering education opportunities, because I had
no real idea about how you did such things. So apparently this editor
walked down the hall to the chairman of the civil engineering department
and said, "Here's somebody who's interested in a teaching job." And
sight unseen, they hired me. I never even went down for a visit. I took
a job as an instructor; I was called an instructor of civil engineering,
and one of the privileges of being an instructor in those days was that
you could begin to work on your PhD part-time.

So I took the job. And then a year later, my wife and I were married and
we then lived for three years in Champaign-Urbana. To make that story
short, Champaign-Urbana was extremely valuable to me, because I learned
how to do two things. I learned how to teach, because I had never taught
before, and I taught for four years there. And I taught a variety of
courses, not just in what we call sanitary or environmental
\[engineering\]; I taught courses in surveying, in concrete, and things
of that sort. And the second thing I learned was chemistry---for the
first time. Because I then came upon the discovery---through some of the
research that I had started to learn about at Michigan and through some
of the research that I was asked to participate in in Illinois---that
chemistry was much more important than I had ever realized before. So I
started to specialize in my courses in two prongs: one was fluid
mechanics and the other was all the chemistry I could take. You could
take one free course at the University of Illinois every semester---that
was the max. So I parlayed that into a collection of courses in fluid
mechanics and chemistry. But then it became clear to me that there was
no mentor for me at the University of Illinois. I had started to realize
that getting a PhD requires that you really work with somebody who---

Cohen: Whose stuff you're interested in?

Morgan: Whose stuff you're interested in, and who can really be---the
European expression is a "doctor father." The environmental faculty at
Illinois was then in a state of intense transition, and there were
really no senior leaders. The year I arrived, three people retired or
resigned from the faculty. \[Laughter\] So after three years, my wife
and I talked about it. We applied to various schools.

Cohen: Was your wife in public health also?

Morgan: No. She's an elementary schoolteacher.

Cohen: Oh, OK.

Morgan: So after a lot of thought, we applied to Johns Hopkins, Harvard,
and Berkeley. We didn't apply to Caltech. Although my wife's a Michigan
person, before I met her she had spent a year teaching in Long Beach,
California, as an elementary schoolteacher. And she said, "We wouldn't
want to live in California. It's so smoggy out there." Accurate in the
1950s.

Cohen: Yes.

Morgan: So we went to Harvard, to make a long story short. And that was
a great success, because I knew who I wanted to work with. It was
Professor Werner Stumm, who later invited me to coauthor *Aquatic
Chemistry*. I only spent three years at Harvard, taking a few courses,
doing my research, and then took a faculty position at the University of
Florida.

Cohen: Now, just backing up a minute, I know from Shel Friedlander that
his mentor at Harvard was actually Molly Scudder's father, the man who
invented the iron lung.

Morgan: That's right. \[Philip\] Drinker.

Cohen: Did you have anything to do with that?

Morgan: No. Harvard had two completely different environmental worlds,
geographically separated. The School of Public Health was in downtown
Boston, and the program that I was in was in the Division of Engineering
and Applied Physics, which is a very rough analog of our Division of
Engineering and Applied Science here. So I took all my courses in
Cambridge or---actually, I took one course down at Woods Hole, in
oceanography. We went down once a month and had a series of lectures and
we did some field work. That was for my minor, which was marine biology.

So we were only three years at Harvard. I wrote a draft of my thesis. I
took the teaching job at the University of Florida. I wrote a second
draft after we had been in Florida for a few months. And then I came
back and defended---I think it was April. So although I was in residence
at Harvard only three years, it was one of the most intense learning
experiences of my life. I developed a collegial and friendly
relationship with Werner Stumm, so that when he passed away this past
spring, I had known him for thirty-nine years.

Cohen: That's a long time.

Morgan: A teacher, colleague, and friend. And he was the person I'd been
looking for---the person who would be my mentor. And I had the great
good fortune to be his first PhD student.

Cohen: Now, he was Swiss?

Morgan: That's right, he was educated in Switzerland. He was, by early
education, a PhD in inorganic chemistry. He worked with one of the very
well-known Swiss inorganic chemists of the time, Gerold Schwarzenbach.
And by sheer chance, he discovered the environment not as a graduate
student but when he was looking for his first job after finishing his
PhD. Jobs were tight at the time. Apparently what you did if you got a
PhD in Switzerland was you went to work for the Swiss chemical industry.
Werner had some sense that he didn't want to work in industry, but in
any event the market wasn't all that great. There was a job at one of
the federal laboratories, which happened to be located in Zurich no more
than a block away from where he had gotten his PhD at the University of
Zurich. It was part of the ETH \[EidgenÃ¶ssische Technische Hochschule\],
the Swiss federal technical school, and it was a job as a water
chemist---that is, doing water analysis and designing measurement
programs. He took it and he discovered water chemistry. He had never
even thought about water chemistry.

Cohen: These things are often serendipitous.

Morgan: Yes. So after two years of doing that, he thought, Well, there
must be more known about this than I can see. So he made some inquiries,
he read the literature, and he found out that Harvard---this was in
1953---actually had an educational and research program in what was then
called sanitary engineering and did a lot of work on water treatment,
disinfection, and things of that sort. They had the leading program on
the East Coast. And I would say that Berkeley, at that time, had the
leading program on the West Coast. So he applied for a postdoctoral
fellowship and so did his wife, who was a PhD geneticist. They each got
\$1,000 as a stipend---period. And they packed up and went to Harvard.
Now, one of life's little ironies is that if I had gone to Harvard right
out of Manhattan College, I would have been a first-year graduate
student when Werner Stumm was a postdoc. But I went to Michigan, and
then from Michigan to Illinois, and then I finally came to Harvard. And
when I came to Harvard, he was just up for tenure that year, and he
received it. And his philosophy had been "I take no graduate students
until I have tenure," because Harvard was notorious, in his view, for
very seldom granting tenure. He thought it was just too risky for a
student, and for him. So I arrived at just the time that he was in the
tenure process. The following spring, he received tenure, and he said,
"Do you want to be my graduate student?"

Cohen: Ah, so you were first.

Morgan: I said, "And how!" \[Laughter\] So that's how that happened. He
was a pure chemist by background. He discovered the environment through
his first real full-time job. And what he learned was that many of the
ways that things were being done were not all that imaginative and not
all that chemically sound. So he, sort of on his own, discovered some
things. Then he went to Harvard. And the man that he was going to work
with, Edward Moore, without telling him, had already planned to be on
sabbatical that year. So Werner Stumm went to Harvard and worked alone
for twelve months. They gave him a little corner of the laboratory. He
didn't speak very much English. He learned how to write on his own. And
at the end of the year, he wrote a paper and showed it to Moore, who had
come back from sabbatical at about that time. And Moore said, "This is
tremendous. How did you do this?" It was on calcium carbonate inhibition
of corrosion of metals, which was water pipes. It was a chemical attack
of a sort that never had been done before. And Moore said, "You should
publish this. You should send this straight away to the leading journal
in the field," which at that time was the *Journal of the American
Waterworks Association*. And Werner, thinking it was the polite thing to
do, offered to have Moore as a coauthor. And Moore honestly said, "I
have nothing to do with this. This is your work. Submit it." It's one of
the really classic papers.

Cohen: Is that right?

Morgan: And he did it all on his own. Anyway, Harvard had the good sense
a year later to invite him back.

Cohen: To keep him there?

Morgan: No, he went back to Switzerland. But a year later they had a
search for a young faculty member in what was then called sanitary
chemistry, and they hired him in 1956. When I arrived at Harvard, four
years later, he was just coming up for tenure, as I said---which was
very early at Harvard, because Harvard usually takes about eight to ten
years to make a tenure decision. So that means---now that I look
back---that he must have been sensational.

Cohen: Well, he was a real pioneer, too.

Morgan: I just knew that he was a brilliant teacher. I took his course
when I arrived, and he had a way of teaching that was entirely original,
very imaginative; he had flair. I learned how he wrote. One day I came
into his office when he was working on a paper. He had a desk near the
window, a big desk. There were about a dozen books spread out, opened to
different pages. They were all examples of good scientific writing. And
he was---

Cohen: Plagiarizing? \[Laughter\]

Morgan: No, he wasn't plagiarizing; he was learning words. He didn't
have a vocabulary. So he would have a word in German, and then he would
try to find the corresponding word. So as a result, some of his early
papers tend to have some unusual sort of self-invented clichÃ©s in them.

Cohen: \[Laughter\] What fun!

Morgan: Which were his adaptations of classical chemical textbooks and
journal articles and so forth. I thought, "How would I do it, if I had
to learn?"

Cohen: That's certainly a good way to do it.

Morgan: He just taught himself.

Cohen: It sounds like he had a lot of gray matter.

Morgan: Yes. Very original. Very original.

Cohen: So you were there with him for three years?

Morgan: Three years.

Cohen: And evidently you established a really fast, firm friendship,
aside from everything else.

Morgan: That's right. And I took the job at Florida because (a) it was
the only job that was available to do water chemistry, as I now saw
myself---

Cohen: So you called yourself a water chemist.

Morgan: I now saw myself as a civil engineer turned water chemist. One
of my close friends at the University of North Carolina, a man very
senior to me, often refers to me as an engineer gone wrong. When Werner
and I received the Stockholm Water Prize announcement, Dan Okun sent me
a very nice letter saying, "You haven't done so badly for an engineer
gone wrong." \[Laughter\]

Cohen: Oh, how nice! So you lived where in Florida?

Morgan: Gainesville. The University of Florida at Gainesville. We were
there for two years. It was pretty clear we didn't want to stay.

Cohen: Oh, it's very different from Cambridge.

Morgan: It was very different. It was a very backwater area, although
the university was a good university. And I was in the chemistry
department there. That is, my labs and my office were in the chemistry
department. And I had a joint appointment between chemistry and
environmental engineering. It was now called environmental engineering
at the University of Florida already.

Cohen: Oh, OK. So we're in the early sixties?

Morgan: 1963.

Cohen: So the word "environmental" is creeping into the language.

Morgan: Yes. And Jack \[McKee\], as I said before, had already used it
for the name of the new program here in 1960. Keck \[W. M. Keck
Engineering Laboratories\] was to be part environmental health
engineering, \[part\] water resources engineering, and \[part\] material
science, which it still is to this day.

My wife and I had a sense that we didn't want to stay \[in Florida\]
because she couldn't stand the bugs, I couldn't stand the humidity, and
together we couldn't stand the culture of Gainesville. But I wasn't
looking for a job. It's been my habit that good things happen to
me---that if you do good work, your work gets heard about. So it was the
following very, very unusual set of circumstances: In 1965 I came to
Caltech. And in the year leading up to that, Caltech had decided they
wanted to hire a young water chemist. Apparently, recommendations about
me came from three quite unusual sources, in the words of Jack McKee,
because he couldn't imagine that these three different people could all
agree on one person, or on anything! And those three people were Gordon
M. Fair, who was the great man of sanitary environmental engineering at
Harvard---

Cohen: Fair?

Morgan: South African, I think, originally. I think he was probably a
student or a colleague of Drinker's, because he had an appointment both
in engineering and in public health. And the second was Werner Stumm.
Jack had already met Werner Stumm and knew that he was eccentric and,
from Jack's point of view, probably slightly insane, being a Swiss. And
then the third was Sheldon Friedlander. And how I came to meet Sheldon
was that at the very tender age of thirty-two I got appointed to a
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences review panel for
reviewing research grants. I still don't know to this day how that
happened, but somebody must have put my name into the hopper. And they
needed somebody who was water-quality oriented and so forth. That was a
multidisciplinary panel; it had about a dozen people. It covered air
pollution, biology, water pollution, and industrial health. And who else
was on the panel but Sheldon Friedlander---he had just come to Caltech,
in 1964.

Cohen: He was at Johns Hopkins before that?

Morgan: Yes, he had just come to Caltech. And he went back and told Jack
McKee, "That's the guy you've got to hire." \[Laughter\] So that's why
Jack told me later, with some amusement, that it was the strangest set
of circumstances, because he couldn't imagine---

Cohen: Three people like that agreeing on anything.

Morgan: Right.

Cohen: Well, maybe if they'd known the others were of the same mind,
they might not have.

Morgan: To make a long story short, they invited me out, I gave a
seminar, they offered me a job, and then I almost blew it. I was so busy
at Florida trying to help teach in the program, and I had already taken
on helping finish a graduate student, and Fred Lindvall \[professor of
electrical and mechanical engineering\], who was the chairman of the
engineering division, wrote me a letter offering me the job---an
untenured faculty position in the division at such-and-such a salary.
And I said, "Gee, that's nice." And apparently, in my typical
preoccupied \[mode\], I put it aside. And three weeks later, Jack McKee
called and said, "Did you receive our letter?" And I said, "Yes, I did."
And then he said, "And ?" And I said, not thinking, "Well, I'm thinking
about it." And Jack said, "Thinking about it?" \[Laughter\] And then he
said, "If you're thinking about it, I'm not so sure that you're our
man." So I said---I didn't call him Jack McKee---I said, "Professor
McKee, I accept. I'll send a letter tomorrow." And I did.

Cohen: And your wife didn't mind going back to California? Maybe after
Florida, anything is all right.

Morgan: By this time, California looked good. In fact, Jean wouldn't
think of leaving California. We've lived here for thirty-five years now.

Cohen: Yes.

Morgan: Furthermore, the air, for whatever reason, has gotten better.

Cohen: It has gotten better, yes.

Morgan: So that's how I arrived at Caltech, through that circuitous
pathway.

Cohen: Well, you had visited, because you had given a seminar here.

Morgan: I gave a seminar in January of 1965.

Cohen: You were coming from Florida, so it didn't matter, but January is
the month when you see the flowers blooming.

Morgan: It was entirely accidental, because I was going to one of these
NIEH study-section meetings, which was held on the \[University of
California at\] Riverside campus. So they said, "As long as you're in
Riverside, why don't you come over?" So I came over to Caltech and gave
a seminar. I remember that I gave the seminar in the same room we use to
this day: 142 Keck. And I remember what I talked about. And for some
reason the room was absolutely packed and people were literally sitting
in the aisles on those little steps that they had in those days in 142
Keck. And all I remember is that I was on a fifty-minute high. I just
talked and talked and talked. It turns out I was talking about new
approaches to treating water using synthetic polymers, polyelectrolytes,
which were becoming available at the time. It was the main research that
I was doing with my doctoral student at Florida. And afterward I
remember people coming up and asking me questions and saying, "Boy, this
is really exciting work!" I was really on a high. And then I went back
to Florida. \[Laughter\] That was January. And then the job offer came
about six weeks later.

Cohen: And so you went the following fall? You moved to California?

Morgan: We arrived September 1^st^. I remember, because I drove out and
took my graduate student with me, who was going to become my first
postdoc at Caltech. And Jean and the children flew to Detroit to visit
her parents, and then they flew from Detroit to Los Angeles.

Cohen: When you came then, you didn't have to worry about a grant? The
money was here for you?

Morgan: No, I wrote grants.

Cohen: I see. You were doing that already. OK.

Morgan: I wrote grants. I had already had two grants at the University
of Florida, and I transferred both of them, which you could do as long
as the University of Florida agreed to let you do it. And some of the
equipment actually came with me. And my dowry at Caltech was a \$16,000
piece of equipment that Fred Lindvall agreed \[on\]. That was it.
Start-up packages today for young faculty members tend to go, in some
areas, up toward a million, depending on the field---a few hundred
thousand anyway. He asked me if there was an important piece of
equipment that I needed. Well, there *was* an important piece of
equipment I needed, and it seemed to me that \$16,000 was an awful lot
of money, because in those days a grant itself would be something like
\$50,000 for two years. So they kindly bought a Coulter counter, which
is a particle-size---

Cohen: Coulter?

Morgan: It was used for red-blood-cell analysis. It was for counting
red-blood-cell particles and sizing them. And I was interested in using
it for particles in water. So they said, "We'll buy it for you." When I
arrived, they gave me the money and I bought it.

Cohen: And you were in Keck right from the beginning?

Morgan: I was in Keck right from the beginning. My office, at first, was
in the basement. And my lab was pretty much right across the hall in the
basement for many, many years. And the only reason I ever moved to the
first floor was that Sheldon Friedlander left in 1978 to go to UCLA and
I had always coveted an office on the first floor, because there was no
view from the basement. You looked out at a wall. So I inherited his
office.

Cohen: He took his rugs with him, though? \[Laughter\]

Morgan: He did. That's right. Sheldon had a lot of style. I remember one
of the things about his office was that he moved wooden furniture into
it. He didn't like the steel furniture. But he was a very, very good
colleague, and he helped me learn the ropes. \[Tape ends\]

Begin Tape 1, Side 2

Morgan: I had been warned beforehand that a young professor might come
too much under the influence of a senior professor and not be seen as
his own person.

Cohen: That's true.

Morgan: And that danger, according to Werner Stumm, was none other than
Jack McKee, because Jack was one of the most strong-willed and
single-minded people that I had ever met. And he had to have those
qualities, because he built the program at Caltech essentially from
scratch. He came out in 1949 to become a professor. Prior to that, I
think Franklin Thomas had taught a water course, but that was it. So
over the next ten years, Jack was it. And he got the license to build a
laboratory. He actually got money from the United States Public Health
Service to build the Keck Laboratory, and the other half was raised by
Caltech from the \[W. M.\] Keck \[Foundation\] and the Superior Oil
Company. When the building came to be built, Jack learned---or Caltech
learned---that you couldn't put the name of the Keck family on the
building if half the money came from the United States government. So
Keck said, "We'll pay for all of it." Jack said it was one of the
hardest things he ever had to do---to send back \$2.5 million to the
federal government. \[Laughter\]

So I was very fond of Jack. I liked Jack. And I never had a bit of
trouble with him. But Werner warned me, because he thought---just as
Jack thought that Werner Stumm was very eccentric, you know, being a
European---Werner thought that Jack McKee was very eccentric: both
eccentric about science and eccentric in his strong-willed determination
and so forth. So apparently, without telling me, Werner told Jack, "I
want to give you a warning about Morgan." I learned this ten years
later.

Cohen: Yes?

Morgan: He said, "Morgan gets very, very angry if you try to push him
around."

Cohen: \[Laughter\] Did he just make that up?

Morgan: As far as I can tell, he made it up! Nobody ever tried to push
me around at Harvard. I was always pretty strong-willed, but not to the
point of \[being a problem\]. So I used to wonder, "Why is Jack treating
me so gingerly?" He never even tried to tell me what courses to teach.
Every year, he would say, "Now, you're teaching your course on water
chemistry. And such-and-such a subject is important. I want to be sure
that I'm not interfering with the way that you \[function\]." I said,
"Don't worry, Jack. That's fine." So Sheldon Friedlander, I think, was
much more a guide to me in those early days, because Jack was avoiding
me and I was avoiding Jack. \[Laughter\]

Cohen: Oh, funny. OK.

Morgan: So I systematically never participated---

Cohen: I would guess he didn't push Shel Friedlander around.

Morgan: No! Jack hired three very, very single-minded people---and this
is to his credit---in about a two-year period. He hired Wheeler North
\[professor of environmental science, emeritus\], he hired Shel
Friedlander, and he hired me. Prior to that, although I wasn't here, I
think that his hires had not been successful. He hired in those same
areas---chemistry, biology, air pollution---and he hired I think three
people, whose names aren't even known to me, but they didn't make the
Caltech standard and they didn't stay even long enough to find out that
they didn't. They were here and gone. So I've often thought that Jack
really must have been a superb student, because the next time around, as
far as I'm concerned, he hired---

Cohen: Independent people.

Morgan: Independent people. And he let them be independent.

Cohen: Well, that's the Caltech style.

Morgan: That's right. I think he may have made a miscalculation in the
first incarnation, but he didn't make any mistake the second time.

Cohen: So was this a novel kind of department?

Morgan: Yes, it was. It was a novel kind of department nationally. The
closest similarity was actually the department I had earned my PhD in at
Harvard. But what was really novel about this department that Jack
constructed is that it had, in the same group of faculty, expertise in
water and air and in chemistry and biology, and that was very unusual.
At Harvard, if you wanted to do air work, you went over to Drinker's
operation, which was then Les Silverman's operation over in Boston. If
you wanted to do water work, you were in Pierce Hall, in Cambridge. And
never those twain met. Here, in the same building, we had people
doing\.... Sheldon Friedlander was absolutely one of the world's best
atmospheric scientists when I arrived, and he only got better. So that
was very, very unusual.

Cohen: That's a strength of Caltech's, of course---putting people
together closely.

Morgan: Of course. Yes. I'm aware that one of the models for that is the
biology-chemistry synergy over the years at Caltech. And that was also a
strength at Harvard, but on a more modest scale, in that it was pretty
much all water-centered in Pierce Hall. They didn't extend it, and still
don't, in a sense. At Harvard today, which now has one of the very best
atmospheric chemistry programs, from a global perspective, in the United
States---the air people and the water people are sort of still separate,
although geographically much closer now. There's still a very, very
strong interest in health over in the School of Public Health in Boston.
And indeed, my colleague Glen Cass \[professor of environmental
engineering and mechanical engineering\] has a very active collaboration
with faculty members in the air program at the School of Public Health
in Boston.

Cohen: Of course, this place must have been different in the sense that
there wasn't much \[work in\] public health---I mean, not being
connected with medical schools or anything. So Caltech must have been
different.

Morgan: Absolutely. There's always been a strangeness. And that's why I
think the name "environmental health engineering" only survived five
years after I came. Because in 1970 a new degree program was created by
the agreement of McKee, \[Norman\] Brooks \[Irvine Professor of
Environmental and Civil Engineering, emeritus\], who was a senior person
and one of my closest colleagues---

Cohen: Now, was he part of this group when you came?

Morgan: When I came, the Keck building was divided north and south into
two areas. At the northern end was hydraulics and water
resources---\[Vito\] Vanoni, Brooks, \[Fredric\] Raichlen---and at the
southern end, with my arrival, were McKee, Friedlander, North, and
Morgan. So there were seven people, but they were in two parts. And I
don't know how it originated, because I wasn't tenured at the time the
decision was made. My tenure decision was made four years after I came,
in 1969, but the wheels were already in motion to create a new degree
program called environmental engineering science---to take the "health"
part out of it, in recognition that it really wasn't that. Although what
Sheldon Friedlander did was very much related to health, because his
genius was finding out what the exposure of a human population would be
to a pollutant, in his reconstructions of things like the famous London
fog, and smog, and so forth. So exposure was what he was very, very good
at modeling and predicting and analyzing. Though I think it was a coming
together of Friedlander and Brooks. They agreed that it would be healthy
for us to have a program with a different name, which would not be a
subset of civil engineering. Both of the others were subsets of civil
engineering. And the strategy was really very, very simple. It was to
attract students from a much wider range of undergraduate disciplines by
calling the program environmental engineering science and by trying to
attract scientists from chemistry, physics, biology, and mathematics and
engineers from mechanical, chemical, and civil \[engineering\]. And it
worked. The visibility of the program as an entity which was different
from any other program in the United States was immediately established.
And we started to attract, I think, some of the very best students in
the United States over the next twenty-five years. We're approaching
thirty years of existence as a degree program. As is very often the case
in change, there was an unintended casualty. And I think the unintended
casualty, from my point of view, may have been civil engineering,
because I think a hole was left---

Cohen: When you left civil engineering.

Morgan: Yes. When all of us left civil engineering, in a sense. We all
left civil engineering. And then civil engineering was still very
strong, because it was earthquake engineering and geotechnical
engineering. It used to be called soil mechanics---what Ron \[Ronald
F.\] Scott \[Hayman Professor of Engineering\] did is now called
geotechnical engineering, but it has to do with the soil as a
structural-bearing entity. So you had this great civil engineering
department still, with Scott and \[George W.\] Housner \[Braun Professor
of Engineering, emeritus\] and \[Donald E.\] Hudson \[professor of
mechanical engineering and applied mechanics\], and \[Paul\] Jennings
\[professor of civil engineering and applied mechanics\]---the young
Jennings---and \[Wilfred\] Iwan \[professor of applied mechanics\]. And
some of those people are still here. But hydraulics and water resources,
although the original intent was to have a dual existence---that is, the
people at the northern end of the building would be members
simultaneously of the civil engineering faculty and the environmental
engineering science faculty---was partly successful and partly
unsuccessful. In the first ten years, there was no problem with it. Here
I'm only telling you what I believe personally, because I don't know
that anybody else would agree with this. But it is one of the hardest
things to keep doing the same thing over and over again successfully.
There's a certain kind of genius needed within academic institutions to
reinvent---

Cohen: To know when to change direction.

Morgan: To know when to change.

Cohen: How about the Seismo \[Seismological Laboratory\] people? Did
they take away from these people also when that became very strong?

Morgan: No. That was always a very fruitful collaboration, and still is.
Clarence Allen \[professor of geology and geophysics\] was a member of
both the National Academy of Engineering and the National Academy of
Sciences. \[Thomas\] Heaton \[professor of engineering seismology\]
today is a member of the civil engineering faculty as well as the geo
faculty. That---

Cohen: Didn't bother anything?

Morgan: I don't think so. So that brings you to 1965, when I started as
a faculty member. And then I started to attract my own PhD students. And
now, thirty-five years later, I'm ready to retire. In the intermediate
time, I will have been the "doctor father" to some thirty PhD students
at Caltech.

Cohen: Yes. Is this a good place to stop?

Morgan: Sure. \[Tape is turned off\]

**JAMES J. MORGAN**

**Session 2**

**June 1, 1999**

Cohen: It's good of you to be here again. Just going back a bit to our
other interview, perhaps there's something you'd like to add before we
proceed.

Morgan: Yes. I think I'd like to add a little bit about the college
professor who really was my motivator to become interested in
environmental matters. That's the late professor Donald O'Connor of
Manhattan College, where I did my undergraduate \[work\]. I met him, I
think, when I was a junior.

Cohen: Donald O'Connor?

Morgan: Donald J. O'Connor.

Cohen: That's the name of a---

Morgan: Famous dancer.

Cohen: Right.

Morgan: We used to kid him about that, but he---

Cohen: He couldn't dance? \[Laughter\]

Morgan: My guess is he could do anything he wanted to, including that.
But he was one of the most enthusiastic and well-organized teachers that
I had encountered at that time in my life, including high school and
college. He had great zest for the water environment. At the same time
that he was teaching at Manhattan College, he was also doing part-time
work as a consulting engineer, and he was also pursuing a PhD at New
York University. This was a very, very energetic man. And he had a very
great influence on me, although I don't think he realized it at the
time. He reinforced my idea that I wanted to be a teacher, but now it
was a teacher of something else---it was a teacher, in fact, of civil
and environmental engineering. And he also simply made it clear to me
that I had to go on for graduate studies, at least. And that's how I
came to choose going to the University of Michigan---largely because it
was a well-funded research assistantship. Ironically, more than ten
years later, he told me that he was disappointed that I had chosen the
University of Michigan and that if I had consulted with him at the time,
he would have recommended that I go to Harvard straightaway, because he
thought I had wasted some of my talent at the University of Michigan.
That was complicated probably because of some personal resentment that
he had toward the man I worked with at Michigan, but also, I think,
because, as he later told me, "I underestimated your commitment to being
a professional. I thought that you were perhaps too broad in your
outlook." I had been student body president at the college and I had
been editor of a student engineering journal and so forth. He said, "I
saw in you the same qualities that I saw in myself ten years before,
because I had been active in a similar way, and it took me several years
to catch up. So I wasn't quite sure that you really wanted to be a
successful engineer."

Cohen: What was it that made you go to Michigan, again? They gave you
the best deal, as I recall.

Morgan: My role model had become O'Connor, and his specialty was the
analysis of the response of rivers to the inputs of pollutants and the
oxygen balance. The man from Michigan who had been the chairman of the
department in Manhattan ten years before, and who had been a student of
the great Earle B. Phelps of Columbia School of Public Health, came and
interviewed students. And out of the people he interviewed, he picked me
and offered me a graduate assistantship. Very late in the game from
others: I received an offer of a GRA \[graduate research assistantship\]
from MIT, which I knew nothing about at the time. The perspective at the
time was that I was a very, very uninformed New York Irish kid who had a
very limited perspective---whose perspective was just increasing
progressively. So I never thought of applying to Harvard. MIT encouraged
me to apply to them, but it was getting to be about April or May and I
had already made a commitment to Michigan. I also had an offer from the
University of Connecticut.

But it worked out very well for me. Because as it worked out, six years
later I ended up at Harvard, but for a purpose different from the one
that Professor O'Connor thought might have been suitable for me.

Cohen: Maybe it was better.

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: If you had gone straight to Harvard from Manhattan College, that
may have been difficult.

Morgan: When I became vice president for student affairs here, I was
interviewed for one of the staff-alumni newspapers---I've forgotten what
it was called. There's a different format now. And in that interview, I
mentioned anonymously the two great teachers who influenced me. For some
reason, in the interview I didn't mention their names, and the
interviewer didn't ask me for the names. One of them was Donald O'Connor
and the other was Werner Stumm. At different stages in my life, those
were the two key teachers. Now, the first man was a great teacher and a
role model but not a mentor, because he didn't see my potential at the
time. Stumm was my role model, my teacher, and my mentor---all of those,
because six years later it was clear both to me and to others that I was
very determined to be a success in the environmental field, to earn a
PhD, et cetera.

So that's a little bit about Donald O'Connor. He died just two years
ago, and then just this past spring, almost two years to the day later,
Professor Stumm passed away. At the time of their deaths they were both
about the same age, seventy-four or seventy-five.

Cohen: It must have felt like losing parents, in some sense.

Morgan: In the second case it did. In the first case, I had come to view
Donald O'Connor more as an older brother. But in a sense they both were
parents, intellectually speaking. They both had a very formative
influence \[on me\]. One, I think, didn't realize it at the
time---Professor O'Connor. And Werner Stumm certainly did realize it; I
was his first PhD student, as you know.

Cohen: Yes. Well, very good. So then you came here. And it's very
interesting---I'm looking at your vita here. You arrived in 1965 as an
associate professor. Already in 1972 you were picking up administrative
duties.

Morgan: Yes. There's a way that that happens at Caltech. And I think
that the way it happened in my case was the committee system, the
faculty committees that one either gets drafted for or volunteers for. I
had always had an interest in student advising and in student welfare,
to use a term that we don't use very much anymore. So I think in 1969 I
volunteered for the Freshman Admissions Committee. And I came to serve
four years on that committee. And I also---

Cohen: Were those the days when you traveled to interview students?

Morgan: Yes. For four years---'69, '70, '71, and '72---I traveled to the
states of Washington and Oregon, which was the interview territory, the
way things were divided up. And I did it during spring break, which in
later years would have been a great hardship. But I think the fact of
traveling during the spring break, for many faculty members, later on
became much less attractive than it might have been. Probably it never
was really attractive; it was a sacrifice, because the spring break is a
breathing space when you catch up and get ready to teach in the third
term. In those days I taught---like everybody else in engineering---all
three terms, every year. So I think the reason I was asked to be the
dean of students in 1972 is that I became known to other faculty members
and to some of the people in the administration through my service on
that committee and on the Student Housing committee. Usually the Student
Housing Committee duties were less demanding, but it was another way
that I simply got to be better known.

I hadn't served on any committees until 1969, when I became tenured.
It's the advice that I have later given to junior colleagues, which is,
"Committee service is a very important thing, but my advice to you
personally would be not to get very much involved in it until you've
been established as a tenured faculty member." Some of my colleagues
follow or followed \[the advice\] and some don't. It worked out well for
me. So I was asked to become the dean of students by Harold Brown
\[Caltech president 1969-1977\].

Cohen: How did that come about? I mean, did he come directly to you and
say, "Would you be dean of students?" That doesn't sound like Harold
Brown.

Morgan: No. There's a committee. I think I was unaware of the existence
of the committee.

But there must have been a faculty committee. And in those days it was
not unusual for students also to be members of that faculty committee.
It was usually an ad-hoc committee to make a recommendation to the
administration. I had no idea about it in particular. So one day I got a
telephone call to come over to Harold Brown's office, which happened to
be in Throop. And he offered me the job. My guess is that it would have
been---let me see. The earthquake was 19---

Cohen: '71, I think.

Morgan: '71. But they didn't take Throop down immediately. That's funny,
because the timing doesn't sound right. So maybe by that time he was
already in temporary quarters over in Millikan \[Robert A. Millikan
Memorial Library\], which is where they moved to. In any event, I
accepted. I didn't accept immediately; I thought about it, because I
could see that it would be a lot of time. My predecessor, by the way,
was \[professor of history\] Robert Huttenback. And when he left the job
of dean of students, he became division chairman of Humanities and
Social Sciences. He had been quite a figure as dean of students, as he
had been even more of a figure, I think, before that, as master of
student houses. \[He had\] a larger-than-life personality and so forth.
My style as dean was much more low key. I spent about half of my time at
it. I tended to be a dean of students in the morning and a professor in
the afternoon.

Cohen: So you really had to protect yourself in that sense, if you were
going to do anything.

Morgan: Yes. Because I didn't give up any of my other duties; I simply
had to be sure that I did them in an organized way.

Cohen: So you continued to teach and---

Morgan: Yes. I continued to teach my course, which in those days was a
very, very high-enrollment course, because the early seventies were also
a time of environmental awakening, so to speak. For a course that before
the 1970s usually had about eight students in it, I remember in 1971
that I had thirty-four students in my course on water chemistry. That
was partly because of the environmental curiosity. So students from all
sorts of different disciplines---chemistry, geology, chemical
engineering, as well as civil and environmental engineering, a mixture
of graduates and undergraduates---would come and take it. Anyway, I
served for three years. And in the meantime, in 1974 I was also tapped
to be the executive officer for environmental engineering science, which
was the new program we had started in the early sixties.

Cohen: That had to do with the EQL \[Environmental Quality Laboratory\]?

Morgan: No. Interestingly enough, it's commonly thought that EQL and EES
had administrative overlap. It's quite the contrary. The EES was the
academic program for the master's and PhD \[degrees\] in environmental
engineering science. And the executive officer reported to the chairman
of the \[Engineering and Applied Science\] division, who at that
particular time was Francis Clauser---no, it had just become Robert
Cannon, I think.

What happened was the crunch. The crunch was this: In 1966 I became the
first editor of the American Chemical Society journal, *Environmental
Science and Technology,* which occupied an enormous amount of time and
intellectual energy because it was a new journal in a new field. And my
job as the editor was to establish and maintain intellectual standards.
I may have mentioned to you last time that the director of publications
for the ACS came out to the campus to visit me---to look me over, so to
speak---and he offered me the job. And I remember walking to the
Athenaeum to take him to lunch.

Cohen: What was his name? I don't know if you spoke of him.

Morgan: His name was Richard Kenyon. He was the director of all American
Chemical Society publications. And I remember saying to him, "You know,
I have a feeling that I'm really too young for this job," because in
1966 I was just thirty-four going on thirty-five. And he was a very
friendly but very businesslike man. He said, "We've thought about it. We
don't think you're too young. We hope you'll take the job." He reminds
me a little bit of Harold Brown, actually. \[Laughter\] Because that was
Harold's manner, too, not to invest more words---

Cohen: "Don't think for yourself; I'll tell you what to do"?

Morgan: Well, it was that, plus "We know what we're doing. Do you want
the job?" That would be Harold Brown's \[style\].

Cohen: So let me get this straight. You had three big administrative
jobs, then, at one time?

Morgan: Yes. So in 1975 I gave up \[being\] the dean of students.

Cohen: What sort of thing does the dean of students do? What did you
have to do?

Morgan: The dean of students is an ex-officio member of the
Undergraduate Academic Standards and Honors Committee, which has to do
with maintaining academic standards and the readmission of students who
have come into academic jeopardy. Also the person who decides on
implementing, or usually implementing, recommendations concerning the
undergraduate student honor system. A lot of what the dean of students
did was meet with students to counsel them about academic trouble, or
the happier side would be to counsel them about academic success. I used
to see two ends of the distribution of the undergraduate student body. I
would see one end of the distribution---students who were in academic
jeopardy. And I would see the other end---people who were having great
success and needed letters of recommendation from the dean to compete
for a Marshall \[scholarship\] or a Rhodes \[scholarship\] or---

Cohen: Gee, that makes it hard on the ones in jeopardy, because you're
not comparing them to the average \[student\].

Morgan: I actually put more energy into the ones in jeopardy.

Cohen: Of course.

Morgan: And then there was the great middle. And the great middle,
unless you took extraordinary steps, you'd never meet. So my typical
morning would be interviews with students who needed to see me. They
would be scheduled through my secretary. The dean of students was
essentially the spokesman for the administration with respect to
undergraduate student life, along with the master of student houses.

Cohen: I see. So it was something you worked \[on together\].

Morgan: Yes. Probably one of the most important connections was the
connection between my office and the office of the master of student
houses, who was David R. Smith, of Humanities and Social Sciences.

Cohen: OK. And he was living over here at Steele House at that time?

Morgan: That's right. He and his wife were the first couple to occupy
Steele House. So in 1974 I gave up the ACS journal, because I had wanted
to serve just for a limited time. I served eight years as the editor of
the journal. And in 1975 I relinquished the position of dean of
students.

Cohen: You cleared the decks.

Morgan: And for the next five years, my life was rather simple. It was
simply that I was the executive officer for environmental engineering
science, which is essentially being the spokesman for your colleagues
within your division with respect to the division chairman, especially
on matters of what I would call hard-money administration---that is,
\[issues regarding\] secretarial staff, budget, who occupies what space,
where you put the students, and so forth. And Caltech, as you very well
know, doesn't have a very layered administration. So the faculty don't
really expect the executive officer to speak for them on intellectual
matters. The executive officer calls the faculty meetings, but when it
comes to promotion, tenure, recruitment, and so forth, the division
chair deals with a committee---

Cohen: Of the faculty?

Morgan: Of the faculty. So it was not a demanding job from the point of
view of issues like academic promotions and tenure. It was simply like
being the first among equals. At that time, whoever was the executive
officer, your time had come to be the spokesman and the go-between for
all the rest of your colleagues. And I liked that job, and I held it for
six years.

Cohen: Do you think it's true anymore?

Morgan: I think that in our division---Engineering and Applied Science,
which is a very, very complex division---there are eight, or possibly
nine, executive officers. There were fewer at that time. They all report
to the division chair. The division chair's style changes with division
chairs. I think at the present time our division chair \[John H.
Seinfeld, Nohl Professor and professor of chemical engineering\] likes
to make much more use of the executive officers as a channel of
communication than was the case in my time, twenty-five years ago. I
think it's very different in different divisions. Engineering is a very
large and polyglot division. We have seventy-some faculty members. There
are at least eight, nine, or ten distinct areas that you would recognize
as departments.

Cohen: So it's the biggest division.

Morgan: Yes, it is. And it's diverse. It's very diverse.

Cohen: Yes.

Morgan: I don't know how to compare it to others. I think the most
important characteristic of our division over time is what the style of
the division chair is with respect to communication---more meetings,
fewer meetings. I remember back in the seventies I used to go to
meetings with other executive officers. It seemed almost monthly, but in
fact it was probably about every two or three months. That was quite a
lot of meetings to go to. The division chair wanted all the executive
officers to sit in the same room, and he wanted to discuss---

Cohen: Get things done.

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: Did it make a difference when you actually had an engineer for a
president?

Morgan: Well, I got along very well with all the presidents, including
the most recent ones. And there was Lee DuBridge \[Caltech president
1946-1968\], with whom I had no administrative duty but with whom I had
a lot of fun, speaking at meetings and so forth. I remember he
introduced me at one alumni seminar day, or it might have been a meeting
that we used to hold at Caltech in which high school students from all
over Southern California came and spent a Saturday on the campus. I'm
not sure. But I remember him introducing me somewhat provocatively by
saying, "Professor Morgan is going to tell us about water. Now, I don't
see what the problem is. I've made a rough calculation about how much
water there is on the earth, but he'll probably tell us something
interesting." \[Laughter\] I found him very friendly---usually very much
short and to the point, but friendly. Harold Brown was a very different
kind of president. He was much more businesslike. "Businesslike" isn't
quite the right word, but he always seemed to know exactly what he
wanted to talk to you about before you stepped into the office. In other
words, I think he was a very, very thorough study of whatever the issue
was.

The reason I didn't stay as dean, in part, is that in 1975 a select
committee chaired by Professor \[Fred C.\] Anson \[Gilloon Professor of
Chemistry\] had recommended that the job of dean of students be elevated
to that of vice president, and that one person be both vice president
for student affairs, which would be a newly created position that didn't
exist before, and also dean of students. Now, I had been the dean of
students for three years. I found it a lot of work. I found it very,
very emotionally demanding, because I tended to internalize to some
degree some of the more intense cases I dealt with. So I thought the
recommendation was a strange recommendation. And I know the reason for
it: I think it's the deep-seated suspicion of the Caltech faculty, by
and large, toward freestanding administrators, at least at that time. So
I think the image of that committee was, "You don't want somebody to be
just a vice president, for heaven's sake. There's no need. We want
somebody who's going to stay close to the students. And therefore, we
think the two jobs should be one." I told President Brown that I didn't
think that was a good idea. And to the degree that I was being
considered, I told them that I wouldn't consider it.

Cohen: And it's been that way ever since, hasn't it?

Morgan: No. I'll bring you up-to-date on that. They changed it again,
and five years later I put my money where my mouth was, so to speak.

Ray Owen \[professor of biology, emeritus\] became the dean of students
and vice president for student affairs (1975-1980) and really loved
doing the two jobs together, I think partly because Ray had a tremendous
devotion to students---and still does---but also because it was a time
in his career when he was beginning to close down his laboratories, so
he had the time. Not full-time, but he had the time and energy to be
both the vice president and the dean. I think the part he loved the most
was being dean, because it brought him---as it had me---into day-to-day
contact with a wide range of students.

Cohen: I think he'd been very involved with the decision to admit women
to Caltech.

Morgan: Absolutely. That's right. Ray had chaired a number of key
committees and was also very much involved with the decision-making
process about undergraduate women. In the 1960s, Ray had been chairman
of a committee on the reformulation of the curriculum for the freshman
year. I remember that that committee was still working when I arrived,
but I had no particular knowledge of it, because I think it worked for
three years before it issued its report. And it was very consequential,
I later learned, in changing the curriculum for freshmen. The key thing
was to create more electives, to offer more choices, to make it possible
for freshmen to sample different areas of the undergraduate curriculum
so that they might more intelligently choose a major, or what we call an
option.

But in 1980 I was asked once again, by a different president---Murph
\[Marvin L.\] Goldberger \[Caltech president 1978-1987\]---\[whether\] I
would become the vice president for student affairs. And I said, "No.
I'm happy doing what I'm doing now, which is being a professor and being
an executive officer looking after the welfare of my colleagues."
Remember, at this time I had been at Caltech only fifteen years. And I
had already, it turns out, done more administration than is typical for
a Caltech professor---although neither in retrospect nor at the time did
I feel that it was something to complain about. Some of my colleagues at
other universities used to tell me, "Morgan, you do it because you like
it. It's clear." Some people would wring their hands and say, "We wish
that Jim weren't so much involved with that, because if he weren't
involved with that, then he could spend more time on this." And "this"
was usually chairing a committee in the American Chemical Society or
being involved in some professional activity. But the people who knew me
best---that is, on a personal level---I think recognized fairly early on
that I was doing these jobs because I enjoyed doing them, not because I
was carried away by some sort of exaggerated sense of duty. The key
thing, as you've already remarked, was not to be doing them all at the
same time. I got into that sort of without looking ahead, and I got out
of that as quickly as I could.

So in 1980, Murph Goldberger approached me again. And for six months I
couldn't make up my mind. I was disinclined to do it. And I finally
accepted under the same condition that I had discussed with Harold five
years earlier: I don't think that's one job; I think those are two
different jobs for two different people. So I proposed to Murph that if
he was serious, I would be the vice president for student affairs, but
he would have to get someone else to be the dean of students---and that
I was willing to play as large a role as he wished in helping to bring
that process about, to work with the search committee and so forth. And
he did. And I think he made the right decision. Now, the faculty always
look with suspicious eyes upon what they see---now that I have been for
ten years simply another faculty member, I can understand the point of
view. We view with suspicion an ever-expanding administration.

Cohen: \[Laughter\] Yes.

Morgan: Which in retrospect, in this area of student affairs, is much
more appearance than reality. But in any event when I decided to become
the vice president for student affairs, and David Wales \[professor of
mathematics\] was recruited to become the dean of students, I thought
that we had a good working relationship. David was devoted to caring for
the intellectual and personal welfare of the undergraduates---very, very
serious, but very, very good-natured.

Cohen: You did give up your other job, though?

Morgan: Then I said, "I'm not executive officer anymore." I had now
gained enough presence of mind to learn to give up jobs as fast as I
accepted jobs---furthermore, to accept no more jobs than were really
necessary. So, yes, I was succeeded in 1980 by my colleague John List
\[professor of environmental engineering science, emeritus\]. So I
continued to teach, and I continued to have an active research program
but at a somewhat reduced level with respect to the number of PhD
students who were under my care. That was a necessary outcome.

Cohen: When you say "reduced," what did you reduce to?

Morgan: Oh, instead of having five or six students at a time, during the
eighties I would typically be working with about three.

Cohen: That's still a lot.

Morgan: The style of research that I favor---and there's no particular
reason for it other than my evolution---is each student working on a
problem of his or her own choice for which I am the right advisor,
rather than---

Cohen: Some problem that you want to solve?

Morgan: Well, rather than a programmatic schedule.

Cohen: Oh, OK.

Morgan: And there are good reasons for either one of those \[styles\].
In many parts of science and engineering, a long-term program of
research to achieve certain goals is absolutely essential. My colleague
Glen Cass is probably the closest example of that to me, because Glen
has been working for twenty years on the visibility problem and making
steady progress on it, and all of his students do work on some aspect of
that. They may do other things as well, but they all make a
contribution---and a different contribution---to understanding the
causes of impaired visibility in the Los Angeles atmosphere. And now
their geographical reach is wider; it extends over a larger area of the
Southwest. But my style has always been to ask students who are
interested in working with me what they want to work on and then to try
to find if it's a good match, essentially. So it was easy in that sense,
since I wasn't working through a ten-year program but was working on a
variety of problems I thought were important and letting students either
work with me or not, depending on their interest. During the seventies,
my group of advisees working for their PhDs was usually around five,
six, or seven. So I scaled back just by taking on fewer students.

Cohen: Did you have postdocs also, or was that not the style in that
area?

Morgan: Sometimes I did and sometimes I didn't. When I first came to
Caltech, I had three postdocs over a period of four years, on sort of a
rotating schedule. I found that, for me, the only feasible way to get
off to a good start in building a research program and developing a
laboratory was to start right out with a postdoc. And I think I may have
told you last time that my first postdoc was a student that I had
co-advised at the University of Florida. He came with me to Caltech as a
postdoc and worked with me for two years. Frank Birkner was his name. He
came with me in 1965, and he was a postdoc for two years. He was an
outstanding man, who has had an academic career. He's been a professor
at the University of Maryland ever since he left my laboratory.

Cohen: Now, you had to raise money for the postdocs?

Morgan: Oh, yes, the usual. I think I may have told you last time that
in my brief time at Florida, 1963-1965---

Cohen: That's right. You said that you had gotten money and you brought
it with you.

Morgan: I had already had two successful applications for research
grants: one was on manganese chemistry in water; the other was on the
use of polyelectrolytes for improved methods of water treatment. I
succeeded in bringing both of those with me to Caltech. And those two
grants provided support, starting out, for three postdocs between 1965
and 1970, and also provided the basis for support for my first two
graduate students, who started in 1967 or 1968. In the eighties, while I
was vice president, for whatever reason---it's no longer clear to me---I
lost some of my interest in working with postdocs and pretty much gave
myself over to working with graduate students, but not exclusively. From
time to time I would have a postdoc come and spend a year or two with
me.

Cohen: And they would have to come to you? You didn't go seeking
anybody?

Morgan: I never advertised for postdocs. But that's just my own style. I
think that postdocs are very important in science, but I think that
historically they're viewed as much less essential in engineering. The
typical profile of a PhD student in the parts of engineering that I'm
most familiar with---civil, mechanical, aeronautic, and so forth; areas
that in a sense are historically the least molecular---seem to have the
least need for postdoctoral experience. So all my early students, if
they chose academic careers, went right into an assistant professor
position.

Cohen: I see. Well, I know in biology you need much more time to develop
intuitive knowledge.

Morgan: It's the same in chemistry. The same intellectual style marks
chemistry, biology, and the parts of engineering and applied science
that are now primarily molecular. I'd include applied physics and
material science, certainly, as examples. In chemical engineering, which
is in a different division, the postdoc route is now the normal route
for a person finishing a PhD and going on toward an academic or an
industrial career.

Cohen: Of course, that may have something to do with the job market
also.

Morgan: Yes. Those are all mysterious to me. And I've decided not to
invest a lot of energy in understanding it.

Cohen: \[Laughter\] OK.

Morgan: So anyway, that's a little bit of insight into how I became the
administrator that I was. And then in 1989, after nine years as a vice
president, I decided that I wanted to return to being a full-time
professor. \[Ed. note: In 1987, Morgan had become the Goldberger
Professor of Environmental Engineering Science.\]

Cohen: Let me ask you a little bit more about being a vice president,
because this was giving you a window into a whole other world. Maybe
you'd like to talk about that.

Morgan: What one of my colleagues called the world of levers of power.
He said, "It's obvious that you're familiar with the levers of power."
And I always thought that was very amusing, because the last thing I
thought I was involved in when I was in administration as vice president
for student affairs was the levers of power. But I think what was most
interesting to me about my nine-year stint under two different
presidents---first Murph Goldberger through 1987, when he retired and
moved to the Institute for Advanced Study to become the director, and
then from 1987 to 1989 under Tom Everhart \[Caltech president
1987-1997\]---was how much administration I had to learn, that is, how
much the job of vice president for student affairs had become
progressively more administrative. And I used to remark to my colleagues
back in the division, where I was always a presence and never really
left, that one of the things that I noticed as vice president was that I
hardly ever saw a student, except at the social events where you were
always invited. And this was characteristic, I think, of the times we
were in, not just at Caltech but everywhere. What was happening at
Caltech in the eighties was that the jobs that previously could be
fairly readily handled half-time by a professor, or by a former
professor, say, who had retired or had decided to switch over to
research and administration rather than teaching\.... It used to be that
the director of the career center---which we called the placement
office---the registrar, the director of admissions, the assistant
director of admissions, and several others I'm sure, were all either
former or part-time faculty members. Caltech had a very small
undergraduate enrollment. It still does, but it was even smaller then.
When I came to Caltech, there were about 600 undergraduates. Now it's
850 or thereabouts. It was \[during\] my watch in the eighties when
decisions had to be made about the need for increased
professionalization of certain offices in the student services area.
What's called student affairs could equally well be called student
services, because it involves both academic affairs---for example, the
dean is really looking after the academic standing of the students and
is sort of the front representative person for the faculty. The old
meaning of "dean", from the Latin, is the first among ten. I used to
have some difficulty explaining to some of my colleagues, when they
would say, "You didn't speak up for the students on that issue." I would
say, "Let me explain to you. You misunderstand the position of dean, if
you think that the dean is to speak up for the students. The dean is to
make a judgment on behalf of the faculty regarding the students, just
the way any other faculty member would." The idea that the students need
an advocate and that the student advocate should be the dean of students
from my point of view was absurd. And I, not being bashful, never
hesitated to tell people that privately, if they asked me. In other
words, in order to make proper judgments about the welfare of students,
I think you have to think of yourself as a faculty member representing
other faculty members, with delegated powers from other faculty members.
And that's the way I acted when I was dean of students for those three
years. But now as vice president for student affairs I found that that
was not the same kind of job. I wasn't a representative of the faculty,
although the vice president for student affairs has always been a
faculty member. And although the institute has weighed the alternatives
from time to time---that is, recruiting a professionally-trained student
affairs administrator to be vice president---they've never done it.

Cohen: They've stayed with the faculty.

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: I know at a place like MIT it's a professional who comes in to do
that.

Morgan: Yes. MIT was professionalized in all of these jobs well before
we were. And I learned that because when I was early in the job and I
would go to visit MIT, say, for environmental reasons, I would sometimes
spend half a day, or a few hours at the most, just visiting my
counterparts. And I was surprised to find that none of them were
professors. They were all people who had worked their way up the career
path in administration. The thing that I found was the hardest to learn
was to be an administrator whose major job was administration, rather
than to be an administrator whose avocation was administration.

Cohen: All this time, you were still teaching your course?

Morgan: Yes. And the reason for that is that I really like teaching.
\[Tape ends\]

Begin Tape 2, Side 2

Morgan: The attraction to academic life, for me, was first to teach. And
then after looking into it I found, as most people do, that you can't be
a good teacher in a first-ranked university or college without research
experience and without ongoing research---in other words, freshly
fueling the teaching enterprise. So I didn't give up teaching. Although
in retrospect I might still be the vice president today---that is, I
might have found it possible to continue to be the vice president---if I
had given up teaching. But I didn't.

Cohen: You mean it was fast becoming a full-time job?

Morgan: Yes. But it's still technically not a full-time job. And the
accommodation that subsequent administrations have made---intelligently,
I think---is that the person who becomes a vice president is given some
options, like during the time you are in the administration you will not
have your teaching duties. If a Caltech professor in our generation has
to decide to give up research in the prime of life in order to take on
an administrative job, I think the answer would almost inevitably be no.
But the option of taking a leave from teaching during the time that
you're an administrator is much more understandable. And to me it's
certainly understandable. I didn't \[take a leave from teaching\].
Probably I might have thought about it. I might have actually done it,
four or five years into the job. But I thought I would be a vice
president for five years, period.

Cohen: Things commonly have a five-year appointment around here.

Morgan: My suggestion that five years be the case was received with good
humor but not with seriousness by the president, who said that he
couldn't imagine that. "No, no," he said, "that's just out of the
question. We're not even going to talk about that." And that was when I
had the opportunity to step aside but didn't reflect upon it. And
sometimes I wish I had said, "Well, we are going to talk about it,
because five years is fine for me."

Cohen: It's enough. So now, of course, you were meeting trustees. Was
that a new experience?

Morgan: No.

Cohen: Not really. But you were meeting with them on a regular basis?

Morgan: It was new experience only in part. And the reason that it was a
new experience only in part was that from 1977 to 1979 I was chairman of
the faculty.

Cohen: OK. We haven't talked about that.

Morgan: That's not an administrative job; it's a leadership position
among the faculty, which objectively should be viewed as, "Well, it's
so-and-so's turn now to be the chairman of the faculty, to preside at
the meetings of the faculty, to preside at the meetings of the faculty
board, to work on shaping the agenda." It's a very interesting job. How
interesting it is depends upon whether you have really major crises or
only minor crises when it's your turn to be \[laughter\]---

Cohen: On watch.

Morgan: So, I was faculty chair from 1977 to 1979. I succeeded Robbie
\[Rochus\] Vogt \[Avery Distinguished Service Professor and professor of
physics\] and I preceded David Goodstein \[Gilloon Distinguished
Teaching and Service Professor and professor of physics and applied
physics\].

Cohen: And did you have any crises on your watch?

Morgan: No. I had little difficulty on my watch. There was the usual run
of things that required faculty discussion meetings. Basically, there
are two different kinds of meetings that the faculty of the institute
regularly have. There are the meetings that must be held once a term in
order to conduct whatever faculty business is to be conducted, presided
over by the chairman of the faculty. Usually it's an opportunity for the
president and the provost to discuss what's on their mind. And it's an
opportunity for committees that may want to meet to report to the
highest levels, et cetera. But then there are also things called faculty
discussion meetings, which are meant to air a subject, to get faculty
views, to take no votes, et cetera. I think the issue that required
faculty discussion at that time was widespread faculty interest in some
of the faculty benefits, like insurance and things of this sort, which
were very dry subjects but nonetheless needed to be discussed. I think I
had one or two of those. But the major thing that was happening during
my time as chairman of the faculty, from 1977 to 1979, was that a new
president was being searched for.

Cohen: This was the end of Harold Brown's tenure.

Morgan: Yes. Harold Brown left. The faculty chairman, in my experience,
is usually consulted by the chairman of the board of trustees and, in
different ways at different times, a faculty search advisory committee
is constructed. Robbie Vogt constructed a search committee. And Stanton
Avery was the chairman of the board of trustees. And I ended up on that
search committee before I became chairman of the faculty. That is, it
was constructed in January of 1977, when Harold Brown left to join the
Carter administration.

Cohen: Right.

Morgan: \[It was\] something that the faculty wags say that anybody
could have foreseen and why didn't we see it? But the reality is that
you can't appoint a search committee until your president actually says,
"I'm leaving." \[Laughter\]

Cohen: Right. Well, I remember that when he came he said, "This is a
good job for seven years." And everybody was saying, "That's the Nixon
administration." \[Laughter\]

Morgan: Well, yes. So Robbie constructed a search committee and I agreed
to be on it. The idea was to have at least one representative from every
division. And I ended up being the representative for the Engineering
and Applied Science Division. But six months after the search started, I
was elected chairman of the faculty.

Cohen: Was there any contradiction there? Or just the timing?

Morgan: I don't recall the details. It was just that I had obviously
been a visible person: I had been dean of students; I was an executive
officer. I had a certain amount of visibility. I was the sort of person
who, from time to time, would actually---not to an extraordinary
degree---make remarks in faculty meetings if I happened to be there. In
any event, I was asked to do it, and I did. And it turned out to be
awkward, because now I was the chairman of the faculty but I was also a
member of the presidential search committee. Personally, I wish that set
of circumstances had been anticipated better by me. If I had really
thought about it and realized how much demand there would be on my
personal time during that period, I probably would have declined to
stand for election as chairman of the faculty, because it was another
year, essentially, before Murph Goldberger accepted. And that was a
very, very tough year, because search committees meet essentially all
the time. So managing that while I was also managing the scheduling of
the faculty meetings and presiding and so forth turned out to be very,
very energy-demanding. It's one of those things that in retrospect I
wish I had done differently, because there were many other people in my
own division who could have been certainly as good, probably better,
representatives of the engineering division. It was partly my
inexperience. If I had been paying full attention, I wish that when I
was approached to be a representative for the engineering division I had
had the wit to say, "And who else from my division will be on this
committee?" If I had been thinking and had a little bit more sense of
the moment, I would have said, "No fewer than two representatives from
our division. It's simply unacceptable. No fewer than two."

Cohen: Oh, because it's such a large division.

Morgan: Because it's a large division.

Cohen: But they didn't do that.

Morgan: No. I came under some criticism from some of my colleagues in
the engineering division, not because it was said that I wasn't
qualified to be a member of the search committee but because I think
they understood probably better than I had at the time that such a large
division might seriously be asked, "Why not have another voice?"

Cohen: That seems right.

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: Did you have any sense of the engineering division not getting
its due when you were meeting with the rest of the search committee?

Morgan: No. I worked very, very hard---and I tried to make it very, very
clear---to be sure that every viewpoint in engineering was represented,
by meeting widely and frequently with members of the engineering
division. But, as you can imagine, it was a very big chore, so that took
quite a lot of energy. I didn't get the sense---although such matters
are appropriately confidential at the time and in my own judgment need
to remain confidential for a long time thereafter---that there was a
lack of enthusiasm on the part of my colleagues on the search committee
for bringing in prospective engineers and applied scientists. That was
never an issue. I think the issue was simply to find a strong leader for
Caltech as president. You probably know as well as I that there's some
tendency toward choosing a different president every time you choose a
president---I mean in style. So Harold Brown was a president with a
certain style. And there was some felt need on the part of the
community, expressed by some people, for a president with a different
style. And then after Murph, it was probably "Well, now we need somebody
with a different style." No one was saying anything about the
intellectual qualifications. I think there is some sense that personal
styles, in the way that the institute would be led and represented, tend
to be on the minds not just of the search committee but of the people
who are feeding ideas to the search committee. And one of the most
important things the search committee does is listen to what people are
telling them and follow the leads, usually funneling them all through
the chairman so that you don't end up with a cacophony of communication.
I think our committee did that well, and I think we maintained the
confidentiality of the process very well.

Interestingly enough, many faculty members don't understand why a
presidential search needs to be confidential. I probably didn't when I
went on the search committee. I think what one sees at other
universities very often, in retrospect, is that people who might be
candidates get spooked. They don't want to be seen as the candidate who
didn't make it. So one of the ways to make it easy for people to walk
away is to not let it be known that they are candidates before they are
candidates. There is a whole set of reasons like that. In the UC
\[University of California\] system the process is much more public.

Cohen: It's a public institution.

Morgan: But it's not meant to be literally public. But it becomes almost
unavoidably somewhat public, because you can almost always, it seems to
me---I'm going from memory here---read short lists in the *LA Times*.

Cohen: Of course. Well, it's a public institution.

Morgan: Yes. We never wanted that to happen. And to my knowledge that
didn't happen in any of the searches that I'm familiar with. If you're
the representative from a division, or one of more than one
representative from a division, when you meet with your colleagues in
the division, both as a group and as individuals, what many of them want
to know is, "Tell me who the committee is thinking about." And I say,
"I'm sorry. I'm not free to talk about that. I'm here to learn who you
think are the people we should be pursuing." And then the dialogue might
go something like, "Well, I really can't give you suggestions unless I
know the kind of people you're thinking about." And then I would simply
say, "Well, that's not possible. So please give me any suggestions that
you think are reasonable, and we will pursue them as carefully and as
thoroughly as we can." And I think the committee did that. It's the sort
of thing about which I once said, "I'm glad that you can only do
something like that once in your life." I had never wanted to be
involved in it. It was a very strenuous activity.

Cohen: Well, you had to be running around the country interviewing
people all the time.

Morgan: We did that, yes. We did that.

Cohen: And I talked to Peter Goldreich \[DuBridge Professor of
Astrophysics and Planetary Physics\]---he bought a suit, even.
\[Laughter\]

Morgan: That's a very, very severe move for Peter Goldreich
\[laughter\], who is one of the dearest people I know at Caltech, and I
know him only through athletics. Because we were gym rats.

Cohen: Well, I remember the suit.

Morgan: I know the intellectual esteem in which he is held, and I know
why, because you don't have to have a very long conversation with Peter
to understand that. But we've always related at the level of guys who
meet to play basketball.

Cohen: Well, that's probably what's more important to Peter anyway, so
never mind. \[Laughter\]

Morgan: Yes. Anyway, that's about administration.

Cohen: OK. So you then gave up this job as vice president.

Morgan: 1989.

Cohen: I did ask you, and I'm not sure if you answered me, about your
relationship with trustees.

Morgan: Oh, yes. You did ask, and I didn't answer. Personally, I found
that to be one of the most satisfying aspects, first, of having been
chairman of the faculty, because it was in that role that I first met, I
would say, any trustees. And then there was a hiatus of a year when I
was no longer chairman of the faculty. And then, when I became vice
president for student affairs, I met a much larger set of trustees, for
a couple of reasons. But the most important reason is that the vice
presidents, along with the division chairs, were always invited to the
annual meeting of the board of trustees, which is a weekend meeting
usually held out in Palm Springs but sometimes at other places. And in
that regard I had the opportunity to meet trustees socially, but also
about business. That is, occasionally I would be given the opportunity,
as is everybody in the administration, to speak to the trustees, to give
a presentation. Sometimes \[it was\] about my research, which at the
time, in the early eighties, was the study of the chemistry of the
precipitation from the atmosphere in California---acid rain, in other
words. And on another occasion, I was asked just as vice president for
student affairs to make a presentation about what I thought were some of
the most important needs from my perspective as a vice president for
student affairs. And that was a surprising request, because the trustee
meeting started on Friday, and I received the request from the
president's office on Tuesday. And I don't know the reason---it may have
had to do with somebody else canceling, I don't know. But Friday is the
purely administrative part of the trustee meeting. The enrichment
talks---that's where a scientist comes in and talks about his or her
science---are usually on Saturday morning. This was on a Friday
afternoon, during the business part. So Murph's office simply asked me,
"Is there something you'd like to talk about?" Well, I knew there
probably must be something I wanted to talk about, even though I had
only been vice president for one month at the time. \[Laughter\] So I
gave it a lot of thought that night, and the next day I went and got the
Caltech photographer and went and photographed different physical
facilities that I thought were consequential for Caltech undergraduate
and graduate life. Because by this time it was clear that the portfolio
of the vice president for student affairs involved not simply
undergraduates but increasingly graduate students, who were very, very
outspoken about their welfare and the sense that they had been somewhat
neglected. So I took the opportunity. And to make a long story short, I
gave about a forty-minute presentation in which I used the photographs,
which I had gotten quickly turned around---I got slides. And I showed
the athletic facilities and the music facilities, such as they were at
the time, in 1980. And I concocted a talk. This was entirely my own; I
had no chance to consult with anybody. It was my own, out of whole
cloth. I thought the two greatest needs for physical facilities for
undergraduates were for things related to music and performance, and
improved facilities for athletics and physical education. And I still
remember that as soon as I was finished, John Braun came up to me and
said, "How fast could you have some preliminary drawings that I could
look at?" And David Morrisroe \[then Caltech's treasurer and vice
president for business and finance\] happened to be standing next to me,
and he said, "Oh, we could \[have some ready\] in a week." Well, as you
may know, the eventuality of that is that John Braun, in two stages,
first gave the funds for a second swimming pool and a preliminary
version of the weight-training facility, and then eventually gave the
funds to build the Braun Gymnasium.

Cohen: Good for you.

Morgan: And I was very happy that it worked out. But as things go at
Caltech, by the time the thing you proposed comes into being, you're no
longer on the job. But I was very happy, because I use the gym myself.
And furthermore, what it really did was to take the crunch that I was so
aware of out of having just one gymnasium for all the different things
that faculty, staff, undergraduates, and graduate students wanted to do.

Cohen: And the dependent hangers-on. \[Laughter\]

Morgan: Absolutely. So I always thought that was one of the interactions
with the trustees that I enjoyed the most.

Cohen: Well, that's terrific.

Morgan: And to tell the truth, I miss, a little bit, schmoozing with Lew
Wasserman and Mary Scranton, who used to be on the board of
trustees---some people with whom I had what I call a good rap. What I
found was that the trustees didn't hear enough, from their point of
view, about undergraduates.

Cohen: Well, there was no one to present anything particularly.

Morgan: So I took the step of inviting---I don't think it was my idea
originally, but certainly when I was given the chance to run with it, I
ran with it---undergraduates out for maybe three or four hours to give a
performance, like the glee club performance, and then eventually to have
undergraduate leaders become dinner guests at the Saturday night dinner.
And that still goes on.

Cohen: So you really gave the students a presence there.

Morgan: It should have happened long before. I think I had what I would
call a small part. But my trustee interactions over the athletic
facilities were really my happiest moment. And strangely enough, it was
my first moment, because it was after one month on the job.

Cohen: Well, that was good of Murph to ask. I mean, he must have had
some feeling about that.

Morgan: Yes. Well, Murph and I have maintained a correspondence. We
don't see one another very much, except maybe when he comes up for the
inauguration of a new president. But we correspond. I sent him a copy of
the new edition of our book \[Stumm & Morgan, *Aquatic Chemistry*
(1996)\], which, by the way, I've ordered and will give to the Archives.

Cohen: Good, good.

Morgan: Yes. And I share with him my good news, if I receive an award.
And sometimes he responds by sending me a quart of Irish whiskey, which
he thinks is a terrible waste, because I don't drink alcohol. I still
have an unopened bottle of pure malt.

Cohen: Well, so that ended your administrative life here, being vice
president.

Morgan: That's right.

Cohen: And you went back to being a professor. This may be a good place
to stop.

Morgan: OK. \[Tape is turned off\]\
**JAMES J. MORGAN**

**Session 3**

**June 16, 1999**

Begin Tape 3, Side 1

Morgan: This is Bloomsday.

Cohen: Bloomsday?

Morgan: The day in 1904 on which the events of James Joyce's *Ulysses*
are supposed to have taken place.

Cohen: Is that so?

Morgan: It's celebrated in many parts of the world, usually by drinking
or by touring, especially in Dublin. It's a big day in Dublin.

Cohen: Well, OK.

Morgan: I've never made it there, but I would like to some day.

Cohen: OK. Let's get this little story in here. What is this that I see
in my notes that you were a quiz kid?

Morgan: I went to a Catholic high school in New York. And there was in
those days---'49, I guess---a New York version of what nationally on the
radio was called *Quiz Kids*. This was a television version, which I
think must have lasted for about a year or two. It was on one of the
local television stations, and I no longer can remember which. But they
recruited high schools to send them students to participate in their
television program, which wasn't called *Quiz Kids;* it was called some
New York \[name, a\] more dignified version of it. So I was a quiz kid.

Cohen: You were sent from your school as a representative?

Morgan: I was sent from my school. And I really only did it once,
because I think everybody only did it once. It was a half-hour format,
and you were on camera, and there were three or four other kids from
three or four other high schools. I remember that my specialty, as I
thought of it at the time, was American history. And the question that
came my way, or the question to which I responded was, "Name the present
states of the United States which are the result of the Louisiana
Purchase." And I didn't get all of them; I got most of them. But I think
it was the next day in high school \[that\] one of the priests met me in
the hallway and said, "Hi, Louisiana. Too bad you couldn't get all of
them." \[Laughter\] And I think there were probably some other questions
about math and physics that apparently were easier, because I don't
remember having any trouble with them. But it was a nice little irony
for me, and a little humbling, that being a specialist in American
history---I received the history medal from that high school, Cardinal
Hayes High School, in the Bronx, when I graduated. So when I remember
that, I remember it as both\.... Also, they paid \$50.

Cohen: I was going to ask, "Did you win any money?"

Morgan: They simply paid you \$50. It wasn't a competition. You were
paid \$50 for appearing. That was my moment of glory. And then my other
moment of glory was the William Randolph Hearst American History Essay
Competition, which was held every year and was open to all high school
students in New York City. I was chosen by my school to be the
representative, and I think I finished fourth or fifth in the City of
New York. Basically, they got you all together in a big room and then
they announced what the essay question was. And then they'd say, "Go!"
and you'd write for an hour or two, or whatever it was. I can no longer
remember. But the essay, I remember, was "Discuss the history of the
American political party system over the period from such and-such to
such-and-such." And I think I finished fourth.

Cohen: Not bad, not bad.

Morgan: That was my last great brush with history.

Cohen: Oh. \[Laughter\] Then you got serious?

Morgan: Well, I was serious about that. I wanted to study history when I
went to college. But through a set of circumstances beyond my control,
which were largely financial, I needed a scholarship to the right
university which would waive my lack of foreign language experience in
high school, which was another one of those oversights---

Cohen: You did speak of that, yes.

Morgan: Yes. So I was unhappy at the time, because I thought that my
true love would be history. Although I had no idea of what an historian
did. On the basis of high school history, as far as I could tell, you
absorbed a lot of facts and you wrote about them. So at the time, I was
disheartened. But in the end I went to Manhattan College. I also had the
opportunity to go to CCNY---City College of New York---and the
opportunity to go to Columbia. But everything depended on where I could
get financial aid, so that's how I came to go to Manhattan, and that's
how I came eventually to be an engineer. I like to characterize it as a
meandering river. I picture my life that way. At the right point, the
river meanders in the right direction, and I get on it and I go.
\[Laughter\] So my life as a quiz kid was brief, brilliant, and over
very quickly.

Cohen: \[Laughter\] Well, let's talk about some of these committees
you've been on. Do you still continue to do this consulting? Have you
been on the one-day-a-week bit that so many people seem to do in
engineering?

Morgan: My most important activities outside Caltech have not been in
consulting as much as they've been in what I would call professional
service and governmental service. When I became the editor of the new
American Chemical Society journal, *Environmental Science and
Technology,* in 1966, I pretty much decided that that was going to be a
major---more than equivalent, I would say, as it turned out---commitment
of one day a week. Although in my first year at Caltech, encouraged by
Professor McKee, who was a very, very vigorous consultant and highly
regarded for his consulting on water and wastewater treatment, I did
some consulting---pretty much one day a week or one day every two weeks.
And I did that for 1965 and a good part of 1966. And I must say that it
was very stimulating, because it helped me to have a different window on
the world. I was actually involved in the process design of a few
different water-treatment plants in the state of California. I was an
advisor on corrosion problems and things of that sort. But when I was
tapped to be the editor and finally decided to do it, I came to the
realization that for a new journal---and as the only editor, and with no
staff other than myself and a part-time secretary at Caltech---it was
going to take all my time. And indeed, most of the next eight years---

Cohen: You were involved with this journal?

Morgan: I was involved.

Cohen: Where was home base for this? Was that at Ohio State, too, with
the rest of the American Chemical Society's---?

Morgan: No, no. The American Chemical Society's editorial headquarters
are in Washington, DC. And Columbus, Ohio, is the site of ACS Chemical
Abstracts and some of the support structure, but all the journals have
their administrative headquarters in Washington, DC, in a rather large
American Chemical Society headquarters.

So for that period I did very little consulting. I also played a major
part in an American Chemical Society committee which ran from 1967
through 1969. And that took a lot of time. A major meeting \[was\]
usually at some dismal airport or in Washington, DC. And the purpose of
that was to produce a book which would be given out widely, entitled
*Cleaning Our Environment: The Chemical Basis for Action*. We were very
well aware of chemical pollution. We were very well aware of what I will
call the more familiar kind of urban waste pollution. We were certainly
very, very well aware of air pollution and, even then, differences in
the kinds of air pollution that predominated in different American
cities---so-called LA smog versus East Coast sulfur dioxide and things
of that sort. So I helped draft that report; it came out in 1969. And I
remember that one of the highlights of my young career was that I was
part of the group from the committee that made the presentation to the
relevant committee of Congress, which was chaired by Congressman
\[Emilio Q.\] Daddario \[Subcommittee on Science, Research &
Development\]. And that was the first and last time I was ever in the
House of Representatives. It was very exhilarating, I must say. And I
found Congressman Daddario very perceptive, intelligent, and---

Cohen: I think he had a good reputation.

Morgan: Well, on the basis of my contact with him, he certainly deserved
it. So after 1974, when I decided that eight years as a boy editor was
enough, I gradually became involved in external activities, most of
which were still not really what I would call consulting; they were
government advisory panels. For example, I was involved in several
National Research Council panels, which is not unusual for a Caltech
faculty member, I must say, or for a faculty member in many universities
and agencies, because on these panels you work for free in order to have
an impact on some subject that needs researching. And as a side joke, in
parentheses, once my wife discovered that I was working for free and
making those three-day trips to Washington, she said, "I'd like to
discourage you. \[Laughter\] I thought we were losing your time because
you were making some money." But that was partly a joke, because she
noticed that I would often come back completely exhausted from traveling
back and forth. Most of them took place in Washington, DC.

But I have been involved---as you can tell by looking at one of my many
CVs---as a consultant with a number of public and private agencies. The
basis for it has always been water chemistry of natural waters, polluted
or unpolluted, and in some cases the treatment technology of water and
wastewater. So I've been involved with the City of Los Angeles
Department of Water and Power on several different occasions about their
waste treatment or water treatment plants. I've been involved with a
number of industries and companies, including Procter & Gamble. Well,
Procter & Gamble is one of the most interesting cases, because---

Cohen: Now, that you would have been paid for?

Morgan: That I was paid for. I was also involved in consulting for an
organization which started in about 1970, called the Southern California
Coastal Water Research Project, whose acronym was SCCWRP \[pronounced
"skwerp"\], which was a very, very helpful organization. It was an
organization which was essentially a consortium of the counties from the
Mexican border up to Santa Barbara, all of whom had ocean discharges. So
that left out Riverside.

Cohen: Yes. Now, the one you just mentioned that you said you wanted to
say something about?

Morgan: Procter & Gamble?

Cohen: Procter & Gamble, yes.

Morgan: The consultation with Procter & Gamble was to help them develop
a computer code, or actually to help them learn how to use our computer
code, which one of my advisees and postdoctoral fellows, FranÃ§ois Morel,
developed. They were trying to learn how to use the code, but they were
having some problems with it, I think partly because of their chemical
understanding. So I remember spending several days, both in Ohio at
their research center and out here, in order to go into some of this.
The reason they were very interested in the code---and they were very
perceptive about this---is that they understood that it would allow them
to calculate the forms of potentially hazardous compounds in water, what
environmental chemists have come to call speciation---that is, the
quantification of the concentrations of actual chemical forms of the
elements. You can see the history of environmental chemistry in water
over the century as a progression from measuring elements to measuring
some typical collections of elements in radicals such as sulfate---and
then eventually to: What are the metal complexes that actually would
exist in seawater or coastal water? That is, What would be the complexes
of, say, copper with citric acid? Or what would be the complexes of
calcium with a phosphate ion, polyphosphate, and so forth? So that was a
fairly fruitful collaboration. The joke among my students about me is
that I'm a very successful consultant, which means that I don't consult
very long on any given project because I solve the problem. \[Laughter\]

Cohen: \[Laughter\] Or you may tell them what they don't want to hear.

Morgan: That can happen, too.

Cohen: Yes.

Morgan: So I would say that my consulting activity went up between 1974
and 1980. And then it went down again, because in 1980 I became vice
president for student affairs.

Cohen: Now, \[during\] the consulting part, you were still doing your
teaching here and all these responsibilities?

Morgan: Yes. It's a clichÃ©, but it's certainly been borne out in my
experience that the consulting I did for industry and government and my
service on public panels was very enriching for my teaching. The major
beneficiary of my consulting was my teaching and my interaction with my
students, in some cases putting them on good problems that had nothing
to do with a client anymore but where the stimulation came from a
consulting assignment.

Cohen: Well, I think that's why engineers have always been urged to do
consulting. Is that correct? I mean, that's the impression I have.

Morgan: I like that idealistic explanation. I can tell you another
explanation that I've never heard at Caltech but that I've heard at
other universities, which is that it's one of the ways that they expect
you to make working for that university worthwhile; that is, you can
augment your income. I was never so committed in available time to
consulting to view it as a moneymaker. I always thought that if it was
interesting and sounded interesting, I would talk about it with the
client and then it would either become something I would do or something
that I would not do. I've also consulted with Bechtel on water
reclamation projects. But in every one of these cases, if it didn't look
interesting, my first impulse would be to suggest somebody that I
thought might find it interesting. And if I did find it interesting, my
habit was to spend the minimum amount of time required to help the
client solve the problem and then go on to something else.

Cohen: So that doesn't loom very much in your history as something that
you---

Morgan: No. I think that, like every other Caltech member who has
something interesting to say, sometimes there's a consulting opportunity
in which you say it. But to me the consulting for public agencies and
advising the NRC and working with the American Chemical Society has been
a much larger part of my outside Caltech life than has consulting.

Cohen: OK.

Morgan: I just thought I learned more. I maybe had more influence. But
to this day I still do continue to consult. If somebody brings me a
question that I think is interesting and I can see that I have the tools
or I can help them invent the tools, it's still worthwhile doing. But I
think it would be honest to say that it's a small part now of what I
enjoy doing.

I don't have a single patent. \[Laughter\] Partly because I was advised
by my advisor when I was getting my master's degree at the University of
Michigan that his experience had been that every patent he had applied
for or had received had caused him nothing but grief. \[Laughter\] Now,
I was impressionable and young, so it stuck somewhere in the back of my
memory.

Cohen: So you'll have to be a millionaire in some other life.

Morgan: But in this era at Caltech, as I'm sure you may know from other
circumstances, the transfer of technology into useful results is a very,
very important agenda item. A number of my colleagues in environmental
engineering science have patents going up into the fives and tens as a
result of their work.

Cohen: Well, it's certainly being encouraged.

Morgan: Yes, and they're doing it. So the environmental area is one
important area. And one footnote about knowledge of the real world: My
father-in-law had been an executive with Chrysler Corporation before he
retired in the sixties. He enjoyed talking about future technology,
because after he retired he devoted his whole energy to investing in the
stock market. And he was quite good at it. I remember more than one
conversation in which he would quiz me very, very closely about this or
that technology or process: "Do you think that that's really likely to
be important?" And I always felt satisfied when I could give my
father-in-law what I thought was useful advice. \[Laughter\] And maybe
that was the most important outcome of consulting for me: family
credibility.

Cohen: Yes. \[Laughter\] Well, very good. So what about the spin-off
businesses that some people do---the companies? That seems to be the
next step.

Morgan: Well, I have to be truthful and say that I don't know very much
about that, because I've never been interested in it myself. I'll
confess to a certain amount of skepticism about the tension between
duties as a Caltech professor---especially if you have my profile, which
was as a Caltech administrator very deeply involved in the day-to-day
life of the institute, through my own choice. I never became interested
in spin-offs, so I would say that I don't even have a very good window.
I know that some of my colleagues have a much more day-to-day
commitment---or week-to-week commitment, to be more accurate---to their
consulting activities than I do. So when you talk to some of my
colleagues, you'll get a better perspective. I tend to agree with a
humorous remark once made by Robbie Vogt when he was provost and some
contentious issue was involved. He said---to a reporter for *Science,* I
think---"You really ought to think of us as more like monks, detached
from this world." \[Laughter\] I might be a little more like that than
Robbie may have imagined at the time.

Cohen: Well, I guess it depends. The climate is certainly going in that
direction, though.

Morgan: He wasn't talking about me, by the way.

Cohen: Yes, OK.

Morgan: When my students, some of whom---maybe about half of them---are
now professors at other universities, ask me for advice, I always say,
"Take care of business first. And your business is to be a good research
advisor, teacher, if possible an author of textbooks, and certainly an
author of really important scientific papers." And that's what I
believe.

Cohen: Well, I'm glad you brought the textbook up yourself, because it's
really a very handsome book \[*Aquatic Chemistry,* Werner Stumm & James
J. Morgan\]. I want to talk about writing that book a little bit.

Morgan: Writing that book became a commitment the day I defended my PhD
thesis at Harvard in 1964, when Werner Stumm, who was my professor,
said, "I would like you to agree to join with me in writing a textbook,"
because there was no textbook that he considered adequate or even close
to adequate. So that was in 1964. The first edition came out in 1970. It
was a very arduous journey, partly because my time clock and the time
clock of my advisor were not synchronous. As you may remember, I had the
good fortune to be his first PhD student. We had a very congenial
working relationship. I think we enjoyed working together. Well, I
certainly know we enjoyed working together from my point of view. But
writing the book was blood, sweat, and tears. And Werner Stumm used to
say, or his joke was---of course, these were back in the days when he
was in fact a smoker---"One cup of coffee, one cigarette, one line of
text." \[Laughter\] Now, I didn't smoke, but I certainly drank a lot of
coffee, and I could identify with that. What do you learn out of this?
You learn that it's not so easy to write a book as you might have
imagined before you tried it. And we were both neophytes at that. You
learn that the publisher thinks that once you've signed the contract,
the book should follow essentially immediately. So after a few years
have passed and you haven't produced a manuscript, then they start to, I
would say, badger a little bit. And the third thing you learn, which
almost every professor knows who doesn't write a major, widely used
textbook, is that you don't write books to make money. Now, the
exception to that, as I'm sure you know, would be very, very successful
textbooks that everybody in the world has to use, like \[Paul A.\]
Samuelson's *Economics* or \[certain\] very successful general chemistry
books. Earlier in our time at Caltech, probably Linus Pauling's book.

Cohen: Pauling's *The Nature of the Chemical Bond*.

Morgan: If you start out to write a book to make money, this is not the
book to write. But the book was very well received, and I think it had
the influence on the field that we both had hoped it would. It became
widely adopted as a text---in graduate programs, mainly, and graduate
programs across engineering, limnology, oceanography, soil science. It
became very, very widely known. And it sold very well. And then after
about---

Cohen: How did you write it? I mean, this was the precomputer days, so
you couldn't e-mail back and forth. Were you ever physically together?

Morgan: We wrote it by visiting one another. I would visit Werner Stumm
at Harvard, because the first edition was finished while he was still a
professor at Harvard. So it was easier to visit. I would visit for a few
days or a week at Harvard, and he would visit Caltech for usually just a
few days, give a seminar and so forth. So it was done by mail and by
visits and by dividing up: "You take the lead on this chapter, I'll take
the lead on that chapter." And Werner Stumm---I never hesitated to say
this---was the dominant force in writing the book. Norman Brooks once
asked me, "Why is it called Stumm and Morgan rather than Morgan and
Stumm?" I said, "Because it was the brainchild of Werner Stumm and his
ability to move fast and be decisive. My role was to write certain
chapters, to perfect other chapters, and to be what I would call a
detail man." \[Laughter\] That changed progressively over the three
editions. And the other thing that happened, which is not unrelated to
what we talked about before, was that after making this commitment and
starting to work on the book, we agreed that the natural way to evolve
the book was to have it grow out of our lectures, mine at Caltech and
his at Harvard, and also to take every opportunity when invited to give
a talk that wasn't a detailed science talk, like an overview talk at a
symposium, to use that opportunity as a way of shaping material that
eventually would find its natural place in one part of the book or
another. And that's really how it evolved. It evolved out of teaching
and out of symposium lectures on certain subjects. The first six or
seven chapters were the basic chemistry that you needed to apply to
understand natural waters. And then the last three chapters were more
applications to treatment systems, ecological systems, and so forth.

Werner Stumm was always very, very interested in ecology as a subject.
He called himself, facetiously, a theoretical ecologist. I never had a
very strong interest in ecology. My interest was always in applying
chemistry to engineering problems. So it was an interesting match. The
middle was chemistry. Then on one side of the middle was my very strong
interest in using chemistry for treatment processes. And this is, of
course, an exaggeration in part. But on the other side, Werner really
wanted to say something about what the ecological consequences could be
for a proper understanding of chemistry. And I think that message earned
the book a lot of respect over a wide range of disciplines. Because in
the sixties and early seventies, it was now very, very clear that
environmental problems were not going to go away; they were going to
become better understood and they were going to become even more
necessary to work on. So I think the book found a resonance with a
fairly wide audience. And a number of the students who took my course at
Caltech in the late sixties and early seventies were graduate students
from other departments who were becoming interested in water chemistry
as something they might find useful. That included students from
geology, chemistry, and chemical engineering. Those were the three areas
where a number of the enrollees in my classes came from. So we revised
the book, and a second edition came out in 1981. It was much larger.

Cohen: Is that when you spent a whole year---

Morgan: I've never spent the whole year. I've spent the equivalent of a
full year in summer visits and other visits to Zurich. I spent the
summer of '73, the summer of '78, and the summer of '90 in Zurich. And
Werner Stumm spent most of the academic year in 1977 and 1978 as a
Fairchild Scholar at Caltech.

Cohen: So that gave you an opportunity to really work together.

Morgan: I would say that a large chunk of progress was made during the
time that Werner was here at Caltech, from '77 to '78.

Cohen: OK. And then this 1996 edition--- \[Tape ends\]

Begin Tape 3, Side 2

Morgan: The third edition is about fifty percent larger than the first,
and it contains much more information that I would call new. Chapters on
new subjects, and so forth, which I think is simply a reflection of how
much the field of environmental chemistry and the field of aquatic
chemistry \[have grown\]. The name "aquatic chemistry," by the way, is a
creation of Werner Stumm's.

Cohen: Is that right?

Morgan: Yes. And I think you will recall Sheldon Friedlander, who was a
member of this faculty from 1963 to 1978. When he asked me what the
title of the book would be, I said, "Aquatic Chemistry." And he said,
"It sounds a little fishy to me, Jim. I don't know. What's it going to
be about?" And I would say, "It's going to be about the chemistry of the
aquatic environment." And he had the association, which many people
have, that "aquatic" meant fish and wildlife. But that wasn't what the
book was about. And in spite of his humorous forebodings, it sold very
well. People understood what it was about once they opened it, because
it had a subtitle. The original subtitle was "An Introduction
Emphasizing Chemical Equilibria in Natural Waters." The subtitle has
changed over the years, because our emphasis has changed much more
toward kinetics. So it's fair to say that the first edition was almost
entirely about the application of chemical equilibrium principles to
understanding natural waters. And the third and final edition is a blend
of equilibrium thinking and kinetic thinking. And it has grown to
include photochemistry and transfer atmospheric chemistry---the transfer
between the water and the atmosphere. So those are new features.

Cohen: Now, he has just recently died. Is that correct?

Morgan: Werner Stumm died on April 14th, 1999---two months ago.

Cohen: Oh, that's not very long.

Morgan: And I have already written extensively about it in pieces to
journals that wanted memorial statements. And it's been a very, very
emotionally charged time for me, because I've had to realize that he
isn't with us anymore. But because of the enormous amount of work that
he produced in his life, he still is very much with us. So it's sort of
like he is and he isn't. Anyway, I wrote a major letter, one page long,
to the editor of *Environmental Science and Technology,* which came out,
oh, just ten days ago, in which I tried to lay out both his intellectual
and personal qualities, which I thought had been successful.

But he chose the term "aquatic chemistry." Most of the twentieth
century, the application of chemistry to environmental engineering
problems was about the chemistry of treatment plants and the chemistry
of corrosion. And it was called---understandably---in the United States,
water chemistry. And in Germany it was called *Wasser Chemie*. And the
French had no word for it, which is fairly typical. \[Laughter\] And
there was a practice of industrial chemistry in Great Britain. So what
he wanted to do, and what we discussed, was to try to blend---give a
sense of the unity of applications of chemistry to environmental
problems, whether it was a lake, groundwater, an estuary, a river, or a
treatment plant. And the argument we made was that aquatic systems,
whether they're engineered or natural, are going to be guided by very
much the same core body of principles: acid/base chemistry, solubility,
precipitation, electron transfer, complex formation. And the choice of
"aquatic chemistry" \[as a title\] was not a frivolous choice; it was an
attempt to say, "This is what we're going to embrace. We're going to
embrace the chemistry of the aquatic environment whether it's contained
in a treatment plant or whether it's out there." And I think that it
worked, even though there was some skepticism on the part of some of my
colleagues.

Cohen: So that's really been a very large part of your professional
life---getting out the message of this book.

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: And it's certainly more important all the time. Here I see you
were a visiting scholar at Woods Hole. What were you doing in Woods
Hole?

Morgan: That must have been 1974.

Cohen: That was '74. Did you go for a summer?

Morgan: No, I went for a week. The Woods Hole visiting scholar program
is a very intensive week of giving lectures and seminars and interacting
with students and staff. And they invite a number of scholars each
summer from different fields. I remember that I gave an evening lecture
to the geochemistry and chemistry group. And I also gave an afternoon
lecture at the Marine Biological Laboratory. And if you're familiar at
all with Woods Hole, there are really two institutions that are at Woods
Hole. One is the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the other is
the Marine Biological Laboratory. They are whole and separate, and I'm
told they have very, very different cultures. And at the MBL, as it's
called, they have some outstanding summer courses in microbiology and
molecular biology---now, not then---and ecology. And I gave a guest
lecture over in the MBL on speciation of copper in natural waters and
how that might affect the nutrition or the toxicity of plants that lived
in natural waters. \[Laughter\] It was the most amusing thing: After I
gave the lecture, one of the students came up to me and instead of
asking me a question, he said, "Do you know who you remind me of?" And I
said, "No, I'm sorry." He said, "Norman Mailer." \[Laughter\]

Cohen: \[Laughter\] Did you ask him why?

Morgan: He said, "You look like him, and you talk like him. You're very
aggressive in the way you lecture," and so forth.

Cohen: I'm sure he thought he was complimenting you.

Morgan: I've never read very much Norman Mailer, so I decided to take it
as a compliment. But that was a very stimulating cross-connection,
because it was a move a little bit toward having chemistry connect with
marine biology, which was something that my friend and colleague
FranÃ§ois Morel had already begun to do just the year before, at MIT. He
had been a postdoc with me, and he had been my co-advisee, along with
Harold Wayland \[professor of engineering science, emeritus\]. FranÃ§ois
Morel is one of the very, very successful aquatic chemists who has
written his own book, *Principles of Aquatic Chemistry*. And another one
of my PhD students, James Pankow, a PhD from 1978, has written his book
on aquatic chemistry \[*Aquatic Chemistry Concepts*\].

Cohen: Well, they say there's no higher form of flattery than imitation.

Morgan: Morel and Pankow really represent the great benefits of coming
to a place like Caltech to be a faculty member, along with several
others whom I feel very, very happy about, because they were constantly
challenging me. Did I make a remark to you once that Werner Stumm used
to say that after I'd been at Harvard a few years it wasn't clear who
was the professor and who was the student? I don't know if I said that
to you. But I did say it to somebody recently. And I felt exactly the
same way about FranÃ§ois Morel and Jim Pankow. They were such bright and
comprehensive thinkers already as young men, and they have both become
great successes in their own careers.

Cohen: So FranÃ§ois Morel is at MIT?

Morgan: No. He went to MIT and stayed there for twenty-two years. And
then about four years ago he moved to Princeton, into a completely
different area---geology. At MIT he was in environmental engineering,
and he started to open up this connection between aquatic chemistry and
marine biology, which has really become his signature area. And that's
why, I think, he was recruited to move to Princeton, but in earth
sciences, because, forward-looking, they saw that understanding the
chemistry of the ocean, for example, as a part of the global system is
going to require much deeper research into the chemistry/biological
interface for marine organisms.

Cohen: And maybe he was ready to do something else anyway.

Morgan: Yes. But it's a great and true clichÃ© about Caltech: a Caltech
education, either at the undergraduate or graduate level, will lead you
to places you might never have imagined you would go.

Cohen: You mean it leaves you with an open mind and willing to do
anything?

Morgan: And cultivation of fundamental skills, which doesn't leave you
dependent upon one way of looking at things.

Cohen: Well, that's certainly very significant.

Morgan: I think that's a great strength at Caltech.

Cohen: And how about Pankow? Where has he gone?

Morgan: Pankow has been at the Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and
Technology in Portland since 1980. He is a professor and chair of the
department of environmental science and engineering. He has already
published three books, including one on water chemistry and two on other
subjects. He has recently received the American Chemical Society award
for creative advances in environmental science and technology. He's been
everything I thought he would be.

Cohen: So were these your two most significant students?

Morgan: I would say that I have co-advised or advised some thirty-two
students at Caltech. I think twenty-five have been uniquely my own PhD
students. FranÃ§ois Morel was a co-advisee with Harold Wayland. I've had
several other students who are very dear to me and whose work is very
dear to me. Alan Stone, PhD in 1983, is now a professor at Johns Hopkins
University. He considers himself an environmental chemist. Interestingly
enough, Pankow was an undergraduate chemist before he came to Caltech,
and Alan Stone was an undergraduate chemist. So it's been one of my
great opportunities at Caltech, within the framework of our very, very
flexible program called environmental engineering science, to be able to
work with people who have undergraduate backgrounds from different
fields, like chemistry or civil engineering or chemical engineering. I
always include Alan Stone among the five or six students that I think
have had the greatest impact in their generation on the field. And I
also include Howard Liljestrand, from the University of Texas at Austin,
who was the young man who worked with me on acid rain.

Cohen: Liljestrand?

Morgan: I think it means "along the riverbank." It's a Scandinavian
name. He got his PhD in 1980. He was the first one to build a network
for sampling the chemistry of the rainfall in Southern California and to
make connections between the chemistry of the rainfall and the chemistry
of the atmosphere from whence it came and then to relate that back to
sources, such as the automobile versus the power plant, and so forth. I
consider him one of my very, very best students. And there have been
many, many more. One of the students I co-advised with the late Clair
Patterson \[professor of geochemistry\] was Yigal Erel, now at the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He is an outstanding earth scientist.
And I was so tickled when he got his degree about eight years ago. After
I got to know him, he said, "You know, I came to Caltech to work
together with two people." And I said, "Really? Who are they?" And he
said, "Patterson and you." \[Laughter\]

Cohen: Well, he did.

Morgan: And he did. He did his field work with Patterson, and he did his
lab work with me.

Cohen: Was he into lead, or something?

Morgan: Lead. His thesis was about the environmental chemistry of lead.
But it's interesting that somebody from so far away---in my world
\[that's far away\]; I've never been to Israel.

Cohen: Well, I think Israel is tied into the intellectual community of
the world, frankly.

Morgan: Oh, yes. I was going to give you my joke today, \[because\] I'm
wearing my white shirt. I was going to say, "I'm here posing as a member
of the Knesset, because every time I see video footage of the Knesset in
action they've all got white shirts open at the neck and long sleeves.
\[Laughter\] But I haven't been to Israel yet. I hope I will go to
Israel. I was invited by Yigal two years ago to come over and spend two
months and give lectures. My wife said, "I wouldn't come with you,
because I'm too frightened by things over there," to which Yigal said,
"Come on. Life is more dangerous in Los Angeles." But I said, "Well, you
and my wife will have to work that out." \[Laughter\]

Cohen: Well, that's interesting! Everybody will agree that the basic
problem in Israel is the water: Where is the water going to go?

Morgan: Yes, that's right. And that's the first question I was asked by
a reporter when I was in this telephone press conference after learning
about the Stockholm Water Prize. One of the first questions was, "What
do you think about the future of water wars." And I said, "I think they
would be pretty bad. What else do you have in mind?" \[Laughter\] He
said, "Well, what does your work mean?" I said, "My work is about
technical possibilities. So the serious answer to your question is that
I think we're going to have to use a combination of technical
possibilities and superb politics and diplomacy in order to solve that.
It's not just a technical issue. But there certainly are technical
issues." Israel derives a very large part of its water from the Sea of
Galilee, and they've constructed an enormous aqueduct system to carry
the water from the northern part to the southern part. I know several
engineers and environmental scientists from Israel very well, so it
would be natural for me to visit. Last year's recipient of the Stockholm
Water Prize was Gedeon Dagan, who is a groundwater hydrologist from
Israel.

Cohen: You know they've had to reflood some of those marshes they've
drained over the years, because this turned out to be a disaster?

Morgan: Yes. Well, maybe it's another demonstration of what I quoted
\[Harvard sociobiologist\] E. O. Wilson as saying in *Consilience*. \[He
said that\] we're just not able enough to manage complicated natural
systems, and the further we get from harmony---to use an overworked
word, but I think it means something, a harmonious relationship with the
natural world from which we evolved, and he's looking at it essentially
as a sociobiologist---the further we get from understanding and staying
close to that, the more in jeopardy we are as a species.

Cohen: Right. Well, shall we go ahead? Because we've got a lot to talk
about yet. Do you want to do another session, because you've already
talked over an hour---

Morgan: I'd rather just go on right now, because this is the summertime
and the living is easy.

\[Laughter\]

Cohen: Good. That's fine with me.

Morgan: It's not going to be as easy come August, when I have to go to
Stockholm and give all these speeches.

Cohen: Yes. Will they make some videos of those?

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: OK, because that would be good for the Archives to have.

Morgan: I have last year's video. It's not, I think, as good as it's
going to be this year, because last year it was done by one of the
sponsor companies. The Stockholm Water Prize has a variety of financial
sponsors.

Cohen: Well, let's talk about these in order. OK?

Morgan: Go ahead.

Cohen: Now, I'm not sure how much you want to talk about these early
ones. Here I've got Chi Epsilon. That would be just an honor society.

Morgan: That's the civil engineering honor society, at Manhattan
College, which made me feel happy. And that was it.

Cohen: Did you buy a key?

Morgan: I did. It's like a Tau Beta Pi key. This one had a little red
stone in it, and I kept it for almost thirty years, and now I've lost
it.

Cohen: \[Laughter\] Well, you've gone on to bigger things.

Morgan: No, it's not that. I think I just lost it. It's probably in the
house someplace. You know the old theory, "Nothing is really ever lost."

Cohen: Are these also going with your school---that is, the Ridgeway
award.

Morgan: The Ridgeway award was something that was given to an
outstanding civil engineer and graduate in order to encourage their
future involvement in the American Society of Civil Engineers. And with
it came a year's free membership. So I've been active for a large part
of my life in the American Society of Civil Engineers, but not as active
as a typical civil engineer would be, because I'm not a typical civil
engineer, as you probably have already figured out.

Cohen: Now, the Cardinal Hayes? Was that a church award?

Morgan: No, no. At Manhattan College I was the student body president
and I was the editor of the engineering journal and I was sort of the
*capo di tutti capi,* the chairman of the council of presidents of all
student organizations. In other words, I was what I would now call a big
wheel on campus, and I think I have mixed feelings about it now. But the
Cardinal Hayes award was a social-action award. It went each year to the
student who in the judgment of the selection committee---whoever that
was; faculty members, I'm sure---had contributed the most to the social
welfare of his classmates. Then it was "his"; Manhattan College has
since become coed. So that's what that's about. Those are all
college-level things that you've mentioned.

Cohen: Right. Now, where would you have won the Danforth Foundation
teacher award?

Morgan: I was at the University of Illinois from 1956 to 1960. I had
gone there, as I think I explained to you before, in order to build on
my earlier experience in stream research with Professor Velz at
Michigan. And I had the opportunity while there to work part-time on a
PhD. And I used that opportunity by taking courses in chemistry. I had
already, on my own, figured out that chemistry was going to be very,
very important. This was 1956. So I started to invest my free courses in
chemistry and fluid mechanics. But I never got a degree from the
University of Illinois, because I never found a research project or a
mentor that I thought would be doable, practicable. So in 1959 I applied
for a Danforth teacher award from the Danforth Foundation.

Cohen: OK. Danforth was from Illinois, wasn't he?

Morgan: No, Saint Louis. They made all that dog food and all that
cereal. They're a very wealthy family, and they had a foundation. And
the foundation at different times would encourage different activities.
And at that particular time, somebody had identified that we needed more
PhDs who were qualified to teach and that there was a niche. And the
niche was that there were a number of people in a number of different
disciplines who hadn't finished a PhD but who probably could if they
were given a year or so of support. So I applied for that. There were, I
think, ten awards each year, and I got one of them. And instead of
staying at Illinois, as Illinois hoped I would, I moved to Harvard.

Cohen: And took it with you?

Morgan: I took it with me; it was portable. So that supported me for my
first year---tuition and cost of living for myself and my family. That's
how I was actually able to afford to go to Harvard, because Harvard
never would come up with that much financial aid.

Cohen: Well, very good. And then here we start with the ACS. You got the
certificate of merit.

Morgan: That's for having given a successful first---and I must tell
you, terrified---lecture.

Cohen: \[Laughter\] Where was that?

Morgan: That was in Chicago, at the National American Chemical Society
meeting in September 1961. It was after my first year at Harvard. I
spent a very intense summer in Werner Stumm's laboratory making
experiments on coagulation. That is the process of removing particles
from water using novel chemical approaches. And I've always appreciated
this so much about Werner Stumm: he had so much confidence \[in me
that\] he said, "You give the talk." And it was a Monday morning at nine
o'clock, the first talk. And I looked out and saw what must have been
200 or 300 people. And I suddenly realized, "My God. I'm terrified."
\[Laughter\] But it was too late to do anything about it except give the
talk, so I gave the talk. The American Chemical Society is organized
into divisions, and each division identifies at each meeting one or two
talks that they consider exceptional first outings. So that's what that
was about. And that talk then was transformed into one of our most
successful papers.

Cohen: Is that right? Oh, very good.

Morgan: And that paper then received an award from the American
Waterworks Association---in 1963, I think.

Cohen: Right.

Morgan: The paper was called "Chemical Aspects of Coagulation." And then
it received another award in 1980-something.

Cohen: Is that the American Chemical Society for Creative Advances in
the Environment?

Morgan: No. That's the Association of Environmental Engineering
Professors publication award. That society decided about ten or more
years ago to give an award to publications that had, as they said, stood
the test of time.

Cohen: That's a good idea.

Morgan: Which meant that they had been published some time ago and that
\[they were\]---although they didn't use this word, that much overused
word that we like to use in academics---"seminal." So that paper was
good for three awards: making a first presentation, a publication award
from the American Waterworks Association, and then many, many years
later as a publication that has stood the test of time.

Cohen: It's a seminal paper. Oh, that's very good.

Morgan: So that paper was very, very influential, even though it's not
the subject of my dissertation. Because after that first summer with
Werner Stumm, he said, "Now, you've done fine. Is this what you want to
work on, or is there something else you'd rather work on?" I learned
from him to tell your students that the choice of a PhD subject---to
first order---is theirs, as long as it matches something that I can help
them with and as long as together or separately we can find the funding
for it. And I said, "Well, I'd really rather work on manganese." And he
said, "Well, why is that?" And I said, "Because I'd like to do for
manganese chemistry in the environment what you've already done for iron
chemistry in the environment." And he said, "Done!" So that's how I
received an award for a paper that wasn't actually part of my thesis.

Cohen: Well, that shows your breadth. And then we have here \[that\]
already you were being recognized here as a teacher: award for
excellence in teaching, 1980.

Morgan: That was one of the early Caltech ASCIT \[Associated Students of
Caltech, Incorporated\] awards. It's for the course I've taught
continually since 1967, called Chemistry of Natural Water Systems---Env
142 ab. And I was very touched by that, especially because I had just
become vice president for student affairs and I felt some trepidation
about becoming an administrator. You probably know, or you may have
heard, what most Caltech faculty members tell you when you become an
administrator. They like to tell you, "Well, I guess you're becoming
senile," or "You've gone over to the other side," or "You're the enemy
now," or things of that sort.

Cohen: My experience in my own life in the school system was that
administrators develop instant amnesia. They no longer remember how hard
it was to do anything. \[Laughter\]

Morgan: Yes. Well, I did. I remembered how hard it was to do it, and
that's why I was very touched by that award.

Cohen: Very good. And then we went to the Nalco award.

Morgan: That was for my graduate student---

Cohen: Windsor Sung?

Morgan: Windsor Sung. Windsor Sung was also one of my very, very best
students, although he hasn't continued in an academic career and
therefore I think of him less. Although I should think of him more,
because his work was very, very original. And that was for his thesis.

Cohen: What is he doing now? What has he gone off to do?

Morgan: He has spent most of the last twenty years---in 1980 he received
his degree---working for the Massachusetts Water Resources Agency. He
took a brief stint at teaching at the University of New Hampshire, and
for some reason he didn't find it congenial, or they didn't find it
congenial for him. And he had a visa problem, and he got angry with
them.

Cohen: Sung. Korean?

Morgan: No, from Hong Kong. So he decided to throw in his lot with the
real world. And he was very successful but not in an academic sense.
He's written some good papers sort of on the side, without being an
academic. And now, recently, after about five years as an independent
consultant in Massachusetts, he's gone back to the Massachusetts Water
Resources Agency.

Cohen: So he's still doing water stuff.

Morgan: Oh, yes. He's been working completely in water. Anyway, that
award was for his thesis. We submitted his thesis and---

Cohen: Nalco? What does Nalco stand for?

Morgan: That's one of the major water-treatment chemical companies. All
these awards and almost all of the professional societies, whether you
are aware of it or not, are funded by somebody. \[Laughter\] Nalco sells
water-conditioning chemicals. And I don't know if they still exist; they
have probably been bought by somebody larger. But at that time they were
a real presence. And I knew a number of the technical people from Nalco
who gave talks at the American Chemical Society national meeting. So
that was an award I appreciated, partly because there was a real
recognition of Windsor Sung's work, which was very original and which
really turned a lot of people on to the subject of his PhD work, which
was, in brief, "What's the connection between iron chemistry and
manganese chemistry in natural waters?" They are side by side in the
periodic table. That doesn't mean that their chemistries are necessarily
similar. Usually you look down the periodic table to find \[similar
chemistry\], and they were side by side. And the connection, in brief,
was that oxides of iron---insoluble oxides---turned out to be very good
catalysts for making it easy to take manganese 2 and oxidize it to
manganese 3 and manganese 4, using oxygen as the electron acceptor. And
his was the first work to show that.

Cohen: Oh, very good. Now, you've got here an Association of
Environmental and Engineering Professors research publication award. And
you won that with Werner Stumm in '83.

Morgan: Yes. That's the one I mentioned before.

Cohen: Right. And with Morel in '94. That's eleven years later.

Morgan: The paper with Morel, when he was a graduate student and then a
postdoc here at Caltech, was the development of this computer program
which was very efficient for calculating chemical species in natural
waters---models or actual natural waters. So this was the second paper
that was honored by the AEEP with an award \[because it was\] a paper
that has stood the test of time.

Cohen: I like that. And then the American Society of Civil Engineers---a
lecture, and the Simon Freese Award?

Morgan: Oh, yes. Simon Freese was an outstanding environmental engineer
who lived most of his professional life in the state of Texas, and an
award was named in his honor, I think at least twenty years ago. \[Tape
ends\]

Begin Tape 4, Side 1

Morgan: Simon Freese was a very successful and practical environmental
engineer famous for designing literally hundreds of treatment plants and
reservoirs and pipelines in the state of Texas. And I had the pleasure
of learning, after the announcement of the award appeared in one of the
Caltech publications, that he was the grandfather of David Rutledge, a
professor of electrical engineering at Caltech who called me up and told
me about it. And it was great fun. He told me that his grandfather, as
he remembered, was a very, very singular man. \[Laughter\] I had read a
little bit of his biography on my own before that, and I decided he must
have been a very singular man.

Cohen: OK. Let's see, that was fairly recent. Where did you have to give
the lecture, then?

Morgan: I gave the lecture at an international American Society of Civil
Engineers conference in Edmonton, in Alberta, Canada.

Cohen: OK. And then we get to the Stockholm Water Prize, which is a big
one.

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: What is that prize exactly?

Morgan: The Stockholm Water Prize was initiated nine years ago to call
attention to achievements in water resources development and water
resources protection, essentially. It carries with it an award of
\$150,000. All previous awards have gone to one individual; this year it
was decided to make the award to two individuals, Werner Stumm and
myself, in recognition of our dual role in establishing, developing, and
applying aquatic chemistry to the water environment.

Cohen: Did this money have any of the same sources as the Nobel money?

Morgan: Well, it turns out---I was reading the \[Nobel\] poster outside
\[the Archives\] \[laughter\]---it turns out that Nobel prizes have
different sources of money. For example, the Nobel prize in economics is
apparently from one of the Swedish banks. Even though it's called the
Nobel prize in economics, I don't think it depends upon the Nobel money.
The source of this \[Stockholm Water Prize\] money is a consortium of
Swedish and international industries all of whom have an interest in
water one way or the other, either because they're equipment
manufacturers or because they're large international consulting firms,
or what have you. I think even SAS Airlines is one of the cosponsors.
And when I tell you that, I tell you all I know, because I'm not yet
familiar enough. I'll probably know more after August, when I return.
But right now I know that it's supported by a multiplicity of industrial
donors who were persuaded, I imagine, that water is big and water will
be bigger and that this is a natural thing for them to do.

Cohen: So you're going to go over there and get this.

Morgan: Yes, in August, the second week in August.

Cohen: You'll have to get it for both of you.

Morgan: Yes. That will be very, very---I was going to say "difficult". I
don't think it will be difficult; it will just be very, very emotional
for me, I think, because I have almost a lifelong---certainly a
professional lifelong---attachment and friendship with Werner Stumm. So
I will be thinking a lot about what to say.

Cohen: Yes. Will your family go with you?

Morgan: My wife will go with me. Our children are all fairly well grown.
Most of them have children of their own. It's not the easiest thing to
put a package together. A number of professional colleagues from Caltech
and former students of mine and people from other parts of the world
whom I know professionally will be there. But most of my family will be
able to attend the other award, which you haven't gotten to yet.

Cohen: Now, this is the Clarke Prize?

Morgan: The Clarke Prize.

Cohen: Yes. What is that?

Morgan: I'm the sixth recipient of the Clarke Prize. It was started by
the National Water Research Institute, which was formed about six or
seven years ago by a gift from the Irvine family. And the purpose of the
NWRI is to encourage research in the development and protection of water
resources. It's called the Clarke Prize in Water Science and Technology.
The NWRI is located in Orange County, California. Although it's not a
California award, it happens that the award is presented in California.
This year it will be presented, in fact, in Pasadena, because they
decided that as an experiment they will move the award to the hometown
of the recipient of the award.

Cohen: Oh, I see. Very nice.

Morgan: That will make it possible for---

Cohen: Colleagues and friends to come.

Morgan: It's especially attractive because now most of our family will
be able to be there, except for one branch, the Wisconsin branch, which
is going to be leaving for a six-week tour of Europe the same day. You
can't win them all.

Cohen: Right. Now, does this one come with money also?

Morgan: \$50,000. And I think this work recognizes\.... No, I was
visited by a reporter from Scandinavia last week. And he had his camera
and his video and so forth. And one of his early questions was, "Why are
you receiving this award?" And being literal-minded and a little bit
argumentative by nature, I said, "I don't know why I'm receiving the
award. The people who chose me know why I'm receiving the award. I can
tell you what I've done, and you can make your own inferences." So in
that spirit, I think that the reason I might be receiving the Clarke
award is (a) I've lived a long time, (b) I have a certain profile in
water chemistry and aquatic chemistry, and (c) because I'm fairly well
recognized for the applications of my science to engineering problems
such as improved water treatment, wastewater treatment, and so forth.
But beyond that, I can only guess. I think you probably know very well
why people receive awards: (a) because their work has been judged in a
large community to be significant, and (b) and probably very important,
colleagues nominate them and do the hard work of making the case.

Cohen: That's true. But you need the first one to get to the second one.

Morgan: Yes. Probably it has something \[to do with\] necessity and
sufficiency. \[Laughter\]

Cohen: So you must feel very good being recognized this way at this
point.

Morgan: Yes. There's another award. I don't know if I put it there. But
I was the Association of Environmental Engineering Professors lecturer
in 1994.

Cohen: Yes. Yes, it is here. I didn't see it.

Morgan: That was a pleasure, although physically it almost finished me,
because there I visited twelve campuses all over the United States and
Canada and gave fifteen lectures in a period of two months.

Cohen: Oh, wow!

Morgan: To me, one of the most important organizations I belong to is
the Association of Environmental Engineering Professors, even though I
didn't get around to joining it until 1982, because it's a self-help
professors' organization---that is, the dues are minimal, it's sort of a
do-it-yourself organization, there is essentially no staff, and there
are about 400 or 500 members. It's recently changed its name to the
Association of Environmental and Engineering Science Professors. In
alternate years, they ask a lecturer from the United States or Canada
and a lecturer from other parts of the world. Werner Stumm was chosen as
the distinguished international lecturer in 1981.

Cohen: And he did the circuit for them?

Morgan: Yes. He did about twelve lectures, I think.

Cohen: It sounds exhausting.

Morgan: It was exhausting. I didn't do it all continuously, though. I
couldn't, because I had my teaching duties. So I divided it up into four
major trips. It took me to places I probably never would have been
before, like an isolated place in the province of Quebec, where I gave a
lecture to a multiplicity of universities and students and faculty. And
it took me to South Dakota School of Mines. It took me to Colorado
School of Mines. I tried to follow a formula, because I was given some
fairly major role in deciding where I would go. I decided to go where
people hadn't gone before, for the most part.

Cohen: It takes a lot of traveling to get to these corners.

Morgan: Anyway, I enjoyed it. I worked up two lectures, and each
university could choose which of the lectures \[they wanted\]. And these
lectures represented broad themes from the research of my students and
myself over the preceding fifteen years. It was very satisfying---tiring
but satisfying.

Cohen: Well, you've done a lot. So at this point I should ask, How have
you found your time here at Caltech?---but I think you've indicated that
it's been good.

Morgan: I wouldn't have had it any other way, when I look back on it.
When I first thought about coming to Caltech, I was both happy and
intimidated, because I knew something of the awe in which a few American
institutions are held---MIT, Caltech, and Harvard. Fortunately, I had
built some self-confidence in my ability to function in an elite
institution by being at Harvard and by having spent time at the
University of Illinois, which is, in my view, also an elite institution.
But nonetheless it was with trepidation. When you're younger, you're not
quite sure what you're really up to, and you depend very, very much on
the encouragement of others. Fortunately, I received the encouragement.

Cohen: Yes. I was just going to say that this is a hard place and
everybody doesn't get it.

Morgan: I received the encouragement. And I've mentioned some of those
people to you before: Sheldon Friedlander, Jack McKee especially, and,
in the middle stages of my career, Norman Brooks. And in my time in the
administration I had a lot of strong personal support from Murph
Goldberger, who was the president whom I served, and Tom Everhart, whom
I served more briefly. And one of the things I was going to say before
is that it's sort of an academic clichÃ© that administration is just not
a worthwhile activity for a sensible person. But I don't regret any of
the time I spent in administration, because the administration was
essentially all directed toward student welfare, and that's just one of
the things that I've always thought important. So when I finished my
term as vice president, I don't think anybody ever heard me say, or ever
will hear me say, "Boy, I'm sorry I did that," because I was glad I did
that. It was strenuous, but I learned how to do it. And I may be
flattering myself, but I may have even gotten adequate at the job. But
something told me that it was time to move back to professoring. And
that was also a choice that I now addressed with some trepidation: "Can
I do this now? Can I go back and be what I was at the beginning, a
full-time professor?" And I'm happy that it worked out well. I've had
the opportunity to work with some very good students in the ten years
since I stepped aside. I don't think of it as either stepping up or
stepping down; I think of it as stepping aside. \[Laughter\]

Cohen: But I see you even took up the EO, the executive officer,
position in '93 to '96.

Morgan: That was to bridge\.... I did that with some reluctance, but I
knew it was probably necessary at the time. It was a matter of finding
the right order for moving from Norman Brooks to my successor. So I've
forgotten, but I think it was three years that I served.

Cohen: Three years, '93 to '96.

Morgan: Yes, and it wasn't onerous. That's a job that I've actually done
three times, as you've probably \[noticed\]. \[Laughter\]

Cohen: Yes. I see you did it \[from\] '74 to '80. OK. That's a double
term.

Morgan: And I had a very brief one-year fill-in, I think, for someone.

Cohen: Right.

Morgan: So I knew how to do it. I wanted to make the transition smooth.
Now our executive officer is Professor \[Michael R.\] Hoffmann \[Irvine
Professor of Environmental Science\]. If I had my druthers, I wouldn't
have done it, because I would have liked to just keep going doing full
time the thing I enjoyed. Of course, all faculty members serve on
committees, so I've continued to do that. In the last three years, I've
been on the Freshman Admissions Committee. I've served on the Academic
Freedom and Tenure Committee. Professorly life has a certain amount of
service. And one of the things that I've always appreciated about
Caltech is that you can be both an administrator for some of your time
and a faculty member for most of your time, and it will work out all
right if you give it all you've got.

Cohen: Well, certainly people do move from one to the other here. I
mean, they don't bring in

all that many outside people.

Morgan: I think Caltech has its own way of doing things and probably for
good reasons. And I think your observation is accurate, but you'll
notice that the presidents of Caltech are always from the outside. My
guess is that we just know ourselves too well. \[Laughter\] And we
always believe that certainly there's someone out there who will serve
us better than any one of us could serve us. But I don't know the deep
reason. I just know that even when \[Robert A.\] Millikan came, it's my
understanding that he came in order to become the chairman of the
council.

Cohen: Right. He was never called president.

Morgan: That was his job description.

Cohen: Yes.

Morgan: So in a sense, it's always been an outside person. What I
remember about Millikan, just from reading, is that he probably eased in
over a period of years by spending part of several previous years here.

Cohen: Right. And the people he brought, similarly.

Morgan: Yes.

Cohen: So how do you feel it's going to go now, with the new president
\[David Baltimore\]?

Morgan: I don't know. Who said, "I only know what I read in the papers"?

Cohen: It sounds like Will Rogers, but I don't know.

Morgan: It might be. I'm not personally acquainted with David Baltimore.
There's no question that he's a stellar scientist and has all the
impulses and insight of a stellar scientist. He's finished almost two
years at Caltech. What I read in the papers, to be serious---both our
own papers and our own minutes of our meetings and so forth---is that he
has hopes for making Caltech a more vital force in the Southern
California community with respect to applications of technology. And
that's an area that is beyond my immediate ken. I've had a few small
meetings where I was one among five or six people, and he makes an
excellent impression of a man who can articulate ideas and respond
forcefully and with understanding to things that have been said. But
beyond that, let's say that our paths have not crossed very often.

Cohen: OK. Well, you can wish him well. OK. Anything else? It's been a
wonderful interview.

Morgan: I'm looking forward to a scholarly leave.

Cohen: When are you going to start that?

Morgan: I hope July 1^st^. I hope to receive a letter that will confirm
that arrangement. And in the scholarly leave over the next two years, I
hope to travel a little bit more widely than I've been able to. I'd like
to see some waters, literally, in other parts of the world.

Cohen: Maybe you'll get to Israel.

Morgan: Yes. Well, Israel is on my agenda. The Southern Hemisphere is on
my agenda. And I would like to make some progress on a smallish book---a
lot smaller than the third edition of *Aquatic Chemistry---*about water
chemistry in a wide variety of everyday applications. I would say that
it's an idea that I've done some work on. People have many different
questions that I encounter from time to time about what actually goes on
with water. They range from a young person asking me the other week,
"Where does water come from?" And I had to probe a little bit to find
out what she meant by the question. She actually meant from the very,
very beginning. And I didn't know the answer. And to tell you the truth,
I still don't know the answer. It's sometime after the Big Bang.
\[Laughter\] And in various epics and myths there are various
accountings for how water came to be. Water is feminine.

Cohen: Water is life.

Morgan: Water is life, and so forth. But the earth is also a mother. The
sun is probably a father or a brother. In Saint Francis of Assisi's
*Canticle of the Sun* it says, "Thanks be to God for our sister water
who is humble and precious and pure." So he gives the identification of
water as feminine. In that *Canticle of the Sun,* he goes through a
number of other parts of the earth. But those aren't the sort of
questions I really have in mind for the book. The sort of questions that
I have in mind for the book are the sort of questions that somebody
might want to know, \[like\] how does a water-treatment plant really
work, and what are the differences among different water-treatment
plants. One of our former Caltech students asked me, "What would be a
good way to think about the chemistry of cooking with respect to water?"
So I've started a sort of catechetical exercise. I've sent out letters
to a few friends saying, "Please send me from time to time what you
think are questions about water that many people would be interested in
knowing." I will have to prepare now very seriously, even beyond
Stockholm, for a symposium in Washington, DC, in August of 2000, in my
honor, where I imagine that all of my former students will be invited to
come and present papers at the national meeting of the American Chemical
Society. And of course I will have to prepare a paper. And I want it to
be a good exit song. \[Laughter\] \[Tape is turned off\]

**Epilogue: James Morgan's Account of Receiving the**

**Stockholm Water Prize and the Clarke Prize**

*The Stockholm Water Prize, 1999*

At 9 AM on March 16, 1999, I received a phone call from The Stockholm
International Water Institute, or SIWI, telling me that the 1999
Stockholm Water Prize (the ninth) would be awarded jointly to my Swiss
colleague, Werner Stumm, and to me for our work in aquatic chemistry,
the chemistry of natural waters. There seemed to be many Swedes on the
line, for I spoke to several persons, and I recall being really taken by
surprise and pretty much at a loss for words (and I was still sleepy,
not being an early person). I managed to ask if Werner already knew.
Yes, they had just spoken to him by phone, and he was very pleased.
Would I be able to stay up until midnight the following Monday, for the
official announcement and press conference by phone on March 22, World
Water Day? Yes indeed, I said. I was asked to maintain secrecy until
then, except for sharing the news with my wife. I called Werner Stumm
that morning. He was indeed pleased (and surprised) by the news.
However, our happiness was tempered by the illness he had been suffering
from for the previous five years. He told me that he would be unable to
travel to Stockholm and said that I should prepare to speak for both of
us.

At midnight, as March 22 arrived in California, I joined a conference
call originating in Stockholm, at the City Hall (Stadthus), and was
connected up with Werner Stumm's home, and (eventually) with a group of
journalists to ask questions of us. It is still all a blur, but I heard
the announcements in Swedish and English, I was asked to make a
statement, which I did, having discussed the content with Werner during
the days preceding. I then answered a number of questions about water in
the world, water pollution, the chances of warfare over scarce water,
and so on. I stayed up until 3 AM in Pasadena to be interviewed by
Associated Press and the BBC. I remember little, except that it was hard
to get to sleep after all that.

Werner and I spoke by phone and exchanged faxes over the next couple of
weeks, settling on what I would present in August at the award
ceremonies. Then, a shock in the news from Werner's wife on April 17
that Werner had passed away that evening. He was approaching age 75. His
scientific colleagues found it hard to believe that he was gone. He had
retired (compulsorily) in 1992; but he had continued to publish
papers---eighteen in all---over the next half-dozen years. We had
published three books together and ten journal articles. It was now time
for memorials.

In the second week of August my wife Jeanne and I traveled to Stockholm.
We were joined by several close colleagues from Caltech and from other
institutions. We were feted by the US ambassador to Sweden and saw a
good deal of Stockholm's waters by boat.

I accepted the prize for Werner and on my own behalf and shook hands
with the King of Sweden. We attended a grand banquet with some seven
hundred guests after the awards, and I gave a number of talks, both
technical and personal.

Jeanne and I then traveled to Zurich to convey Werner's prize to his
widow Elisabeth. We stayed for a week, sharing memories of earlier times
(I met Werner and Elisabeth in 1960 at Harvard, as a new PhD student
there). I believe the time in Zurich helped us all.

The details of the events in Stockholm are pretty well summarized in the
documents accompanying this brief account \[*See*: James Morgan
Historical File, Caltech Archives\]. There are two "speeches," two
lectures, and a summary in a SIWI report. It was a wonderful week. Being
able to share it with Werner and his family would have made it complete.

*The Athalie Richardson Irvine Clarke Prize for Water Science and
Technology, 1999*

On April 27 I received a call from Ronald Linsky, Executive Director of
the National Water Research Institute (NWRI). "Congratulations," he
began. I assumed that he was referring to the recently announced
Stockholm Prize and so thanked him, then expressing my sense of loss
that Werner Stumm had passed away little more than a week before. He
said that he had just learned that, and then went on to say that his
congratulations were not for the Stockholm Prize, but for the Clarke
Prize, which I had just been chosen to receive for my work in water
chemistry. I was to be the sixth recipient. The award would be made in
Pasadena in late June. A second surprise in the span of six weeks!

I later recalled the good-natured remark of my Caltech colleague Sheldon
Friedlander (now at UCLA) who had told me over thirty years before:
"Remember, the idea is to live long enough to receive the prizes." Good
counsel, I thought. I was about to be 67, and my cup (of water) was
running over. It was a sweet and bittersweet spring. I felt glad to
learn of a second prize for a lifetime of research, but everything was
tempered by the loss of my teacher, colleague and friend, Werner Stumm.
It was a time to write *In Memoriam* pieces as well as prepare for award
celebrations.

The Clarke Prize ceremony was held in Pasadena at the Ritz Carlton. The
NWRI had adopted the practice of presenting the award in the recipient's
own town. It was an evening affair in black tie, starting around six
o'clock. We were asked to provide our list of invitees. It was a happy
event, a good party. Several of our children and their families were
able to be there. Many of my Caltech doctoral students from the past
thirty years came. Colleagues from Caltech, Stanford, Berkeley, the
University of Southern California, Texas A&M, and Michigan, among others
attended. Three previous Clarke laureates joined in.

The presentation of the prize by Mrs. Joan Irvine Smith followed the
garden reception. A gold medal was conferred (which I was later urged to
have insured), along with a check for \$50,000. I gave a talk, personal
in character and recalling my life from the perspective of water and the
roles my mentors played in what I was able to do. Many photos were taken
to be shared happily with family and friends. An informal dinner
followed. A great time was had by all. We were home and in bed by
midnight.

The program for the ceremony accompanies this account \[*See*: James
Morgan Historical File, Caltech Archives\]. I had been asked to provide
my text several weeks in advance. What I had written included a number
of quotations from spiritual and poetic sources, which were placed at
the beginning as a kind of preface; I had called that part an
"Invocation for Celebration." In the printing design someone decided to
intersperse the quotes throughout the text. It worked out fine, even
though it was not what I had first intended.

The Clarke Prize evening was personal, informal, and over rather
quickly. Stockholm was six weeks ahead. That would be a very different
experience. After all, there would be a king to meet.

James Morgan
